=== Lecture 1 Transcript === Welcome to concrete technology. Chapter 1 Lecture 1 We shall be discussing about cement production and composition in this lecture. Of course, we will start with, we will just introduce concrete as a material because it is a course on concrete technology. So, general outline of our discussion would be concrete material, components of concrete and also we will just mention concrete as a composite at the end. We will talk about cement, the production process and its composition. Now, what is concrete? Perhaps you would have seen concrete or also a little bit studied about it. Concrete is made up of components such as aggregation of stones which we call as aggregate embedded in cement mortar that is cement sand mortar. In its hardened state concrete is aggregation of stones or similar hard material embedded in what we call cement sand mortar. The aggregates, aggregates in normal concrete forms the skeleton matrix. It is about 60 to 65 percent by volume and rest all is 25 percent is the paste. Now, paste means cement and water that combines to paste. So, this aggregate when we are talking of it is the large aggregation of stones sand etcetera, etcetera put together 1 to 2 percent boards are usually there in normal concrete. It is required that the aggregates shall be inert and strong. Inert means should not be reacting with anything and it should be strong. It should be strong so that it can carry the load. So, that it can carry the you know the concrete can withstand forces. Ingradients of concrete therefore, if you look at ordinary concrete or normal concrete it is made up by mixing inorganic material known as cement. I said cement sand mortar. So, this is cement is one of the component water together with cement forms what is called paste and then natural sand or stone dust like something like this as we can see stone dust or natural sand and you know in addition to that we will have board segregate which quite often could be cross stones or natural and cross stones themselves. So, therefore, concrete is generally normal concrete or very conventional concrete is made up of cement plus water plus water. This two makes paste sand which are which we call as fine aggregate could be sand or crushed stone powder and then stones which forms a coarse aggregate. So, that is generally the concrete normal concrete generally the normal concrete, but modern concrete if you look at it it is not only this four components but it has definitely two more components. So, modern engineered concrete has additional ingredients other than this four components just mentioned right and these are chemical admixtures these are chemical admixtures like they are some of them are called accelerator set retarders water reducers etcetera and this ones are added to the concrete system during production in order to improve the performance of concrete either in fresh state or in hardened state. We will discuss about them later on in details mineral admixtures this is the other kind of material which goes into the concrete sometime even in cement making and these are fly ash silica fume rice ash ash and other pozzolona or similar other material. So, as we can see modern concrete is not four component material, but six components material. So, modern engineered concrete is actually six components material rather than four component material rather than four component material right chemical admixtures as I mentioned they are for specific property or performance enhancement specific property of performance enhancement and mineral admixtures they do improve long term strength durability performance. So, therefore, these two admixtures are massed in modern engineered concrete of course, manually produced concrete non engineered concrete may not include this, but an engineered concrete definitely includes these two item as well. And using this admixture it has become possible to obtain high strength materials you know modern high strength and high performance concrete right and you can design the concrete as you like. So, this is what the concrete is this is what the concrete is now there are lot of advantages and disadvantages of concrete a few the advantages are lower life cycle cause it is relatively a cheap material right I mean cheap relatively cheap and you know a material that is used for construction purpose is used in very huge quantity therefore, it is a requirement that a construction material be cheap and concrete of course, is cheap it is what we call low life cycle cost. Now, life cycle cost means not only that initial cost capital cost is low initial production cost is low, but it maintenance cost future maintenance cost during its service life period is also low it can be molded you can mold into any shape that you like concrete can be molded it can be molded to any shape that you like it is robust it is robust what it means is that what we mean is that robustness what we mean is that where I need massivity it can provide that massivity for example, if I have a structure if I have a structure let us say I have a structures like this a dam or a retaining wall. Now, horizontal forces if acting is acting on to it then it must have sufficient resistance against sliding it should not slide it should not slide you know it should not slide along this direction it should not slide or it should not what have done because this forces will have a tendency to cause it to overturn. So, it must have sufficient resistance against sliding so resistance against sliding sliding and overturning that must be there and this you can get from concrete this you can get from concrete not for let us say it is very difficult to make a retaining wall or a dam out of plastic or let us say even steel you know steel you can, but steel is not very common, but concrete can provide this kind of of robustness concrete can provide robustness and you can design it for desired property you can design it for desired property whatever property you want you can design it for that it is a composite now a composite is a material as you know is made up of number of materials or ingredients which when combined together you know when they are the final material produce it has a property different than the original material used in its production. So, concrete is also a composite and composite concrete you can design by varying the proportions of ingredients or changing the ingredients themselves you can design for desired property not of course, very versatile, but quite versatile because it has got two weaknesses one is it has got lower tensile strength and other it has got lower ductility. Now ductility is a property by virtue of which the material exhibits a large amount of deformation prior to failure and such a large deformation ensures warning. Prior to failure it does not fail suddenly, but particulate system bonded by cementing material as in case of cement we have seen that it was aggregates which were bound together in a mortar matrix and if you go further the mortar itself is made of cement paste in which we have sand. So, concrete is a composite first aggregates are embedded in mortar matrix and in mortar sand is embedded in cement paste and if you go further down to finer sizes you will find cement paste itself has got different solid components as well as pores etc etc. So, it is a composite and it is actually particulate system bonded together. So, one can call concrete as a chemically combined ceramics also chemically combined ceramic a composite is composite you know and it is actually composites if you look at it its composite form varies from scale to scale. At the scale of structures it is almost a we quite often assume it to be macro homogenous, but if you go to slightly finer scale you will find aggregate and mortar go to steel finer scale you will find it is paste and sand hardened concrete I am talking of and in the paste itself there are different solids which we will discuss sometime later on. So, it is composited and at each scale its composite nature of the composite varies and you know it becomes more and more complex as we go to the fines and properties of the final product actually is dependent on the micro level composite as well. Anyway we will talk about this sometime later on, but what we understand since a particulate system bonded by the cementing material such material do not show exhibit large ductility they fail suddenly so it is brittle. So, these are the two disadvantages but it is quite advantageous from other point of view. Now to take care of this aspect we actually put in steel reinforcement and you use reinforced concrete as a composite or we pre stress the concrete. Therefore, when we use concrete as a structural material we really use it alone except for in gravity dams or massive structure where we use mass concrete and reinforced concrete or pre stress concrete which are again another form of composite they are quite versatile and therefore, we can design them almost for whatever property we desire. So, that is why the statement and that is why concrete is the most popular material in you know in the R. In fact, it is water the human being consumes possibly water and next material is concrete. In fact, cement is next to water consumed by human being right. So, this is a very popular material that is because it has got all this advantages. So, concrete and concrete composite system some of which you will be discussing like it is not only one type of material it is varieties of material today modern concrete they are varieties and we can classify them something like the normal strength concrete high strength or high performance concrete ultra high strength concrete or some composite special composite having very high strength we will discuss some of them at the end of our you know at the last module then fiber reinforced concrete then there is something called densified with small particle which will possibly come into ultra high strength system macro defect free matrix which is again an ultra high strength system and reactive powder concrete which are again ultra high strength system. All this we will discuss in details at the moment time just introducing you the name of this concrete or cement based composites will discuss about them at length sometime at appropriate time then there is something called polymer concrete polymer modified concrete or polymer cement concrete self compacting concrete and some more self compacting concrete roller compacted concrete. So, some more more additional additional ones are self compacting concrete. Roller compacted concrete etcetera and we will discuss them at appropriate point in fact in general if you look in general if you look at concrete the binders can be there may be many binders like I said polymer concrete. So, therefore, it is also not a cement based composite but it is a concrete of some type or polymer cement concrete where polymeric material is added almost like an admixture. So, you can have different types of binders like I said polymer concrete. So, therefore, it is also not a cement based composite but it is a concrete of some type or polymer cement concrete where polymeric material is added almost like an admixture. So, you can have different types of binders because you can have varieties of cement as well. The matrix is a skeleton I am talking of here it is a matrix is a skeleton that can also vary and I can put varieties of fiber reinforcement to obtain the composite. So, therefore, concrete there are lot of choice of choice are available to me in terms of the binder in terms of the matrix in times of the fiber and like a is a material which has got this binder this matrix and may be somewhere here is a reinforcement because I can use varieties of fibers in the system. We will discuss about this special concrete sometime later on as I mentioned. So, this is just to give an overview of the concrete before we start with the actual discussion of cement. So, let us look at now cement a little bit of history you see mankind use lime and silica for quite some time. In fact, first use of lime as a construction material as reported in literature you know they actually found out professor one of the one of the articles by professor iron bento you know somewhere some of the people from Israel they could trace the first use of lime something to pre historic time possibly 7000 years from now lime was used as a construction material right. If you look at Roman civilization they use lime and volcanic ash because Italy there are volcanic ash is available there and they use them. So, lime and volcanic ash in medieval India people have use lime and surki lime and surki surki is a material which comes out from brick kiln when you bond the brick then there are fine dust which settle down below you know when you bond the brick when you bond the brick when you bond the brick in a kiln. So, there will be fine dust this is the brick kiln let us say and fine dust will settle down at the bottom this is called surki then lime and surki was used in India also largely as a binding material of stones to produce concrete like you know concrete is an artificial stone. So, machinery in machinery construction or something of the similar kind so bind the stone stone machinery lime surki was used. Now, what is surki or volcanic ash if you look at if you look at volcanic ash or surki they are nothing, but clay I can say clay mineral heated in the water. So, to high temperature and cooled rapidly in fact clay you know volcanic ash in the water or surki or nothing, but clay minerals heated to high temperature and cooled rapidly cooled rapidly cooled rapidly cooled rapidly cooled to high temperature. Now, what is ash chemically or clay minerals essentially these are essentially clay is essentially clay is silica. So, this is the clay mineral that is called silica and alumina some amount of iron etcetera, etcetera magnesium come on all these, but main compounds are silica alumina. So, what we are doing you are heating up silica and alumina and then cooling them rapidly. Now, this results in formation of amorphous silica not crystalline amorphous silica and in amorphous material in crystalline material atoms are arranged in regular order. So, they are at lower potential energy relatively stable amorphous material on the other hand atoms are all half as early arranged and it is less stable can react provided physically this material is this material is fine. So, that large surface area is available for reaction. So, when it comes to surki or volcanic ash these are clay material heated up and they are cooled rapidly in fact, there will be some amount of it energy trapped into it chemical energy trapped into it it forms an amorphous material and if it finds and conducive condition it can react and dissipate that chemical energy. So, amorphous silica fine amorphous silica can react with line and can give you hard material hard material. Solid hard solid like stone and this is what was observed by you know this was was utilized in Roman time or even in India even in India. Now, calciumation of lime together was silica obviously, was the next step. So, in case of the earlier once this is the material volcanic ash were known as pozzolans will come to that again sometime later on. Now, this material together with lime in presence of water forms a hard mass you know almost like stone. Say was the surki with lime and water forms hard mass now these are reactive silica basically the surki or the pozzolane or the volcanic ash. So, the reactive silica can react with lime in ordinary temperature, but lime and silica if you combine them together and burn it then you know that could give rise to a product which can react with water itself because in lime surki reaction you have lime surki and water. Now, lime and surki put together heat them up and form into a compound that can react with water to give you similar hard mass. So, that is the idea of cement and actually the most commonly used cement is called Portland cement patented by Joseph Asperden in England in 1824 and this when mixed with water hardens since it means mixed with water and hardens we call it hydraulic cement you know Portland died is a stone name and from that it got the name of Portland cement right. So, this is what is the cement. So, therefore, in this one basic raw material used in this manufacture is calcium carbonate the lime and the you know calcium carbonate which you can find in limestone or chalk and silica and alumina and iron oxide found in clay or shade. So, the difference here is you are putting them together and heating it up and doing of course, something more is just a little bit of processing further will come to that and in case of lime and surki or lime or prozolona or lime and volcanic ash you are actually used using a reactive silica together with lime get similar kind of product. So, Portland cement is this ordinary Portland cement as we call it it is actually produced from lime and clay or shade. So, basically essentially you are using the silica alumina and iron present in clay or shade to get the cement. There are two processes well there are I would not say there they were there were one process called wet process which is now not used much. So, you have to essentially mix up lime and silica in a appropriate proportion and wet process was used where they were made into slurry and you know you get a homogeneous mix of the two. So, in the wet process one would have got better homogeneity about 40 percent would have been the water in the slurry but then when you heat it you have to drive out that water therefore, energy used is more in dry process the technology improved in the second half of last century and therefore, 1998 so 1990 onwards you do not find wet process anymore it is mostly the dry process. So, modern practices dry process essentially what you got to do you got to mix lime and silica or clay and limestone in appropriate proportion and you got to grind them to find size grind them to find size and amount of grinding will of course, depend upon the raw material. Generally grind it up to 10 to 30 percent retained on 90 micron seed 10 to 30 percent retained on 90 micron seed 10 to 30 percent retained on 90 micron seed and this homogenized then you mix them up grind them this is called raw meal and this homogenized raw meal is introduced into the top of a preheated tower and this passes through a series of cyclones pre-calsiner as it is called passes through cyclone separator cyclone separate series of cyclone separators to pre-calsiner it is called pre-calsiner vessel. There it is subjected to flash heat sudden temperature rise of 900 degree centigrade in gas stream and some of the carbon dioxide from the lime is driven out because you know you know calcium carbonate is lime which you heat which result in calcium oxide carbon dioxide. So, calcium carbon carbonate some of the carbon dioxide majority good lot of carbon dioxide is driven off here and this material then is allowed to enter into a rotary kiln. And then heated to 1500 degree centigrade which causes partial melting and the termling action of the kiln converts it into granular material called clinker. So, this clinker because you know it will melt when you heat this material it will melt from solid solutions and because of the termling action they form into granular material and this is called clinker. So, this is called OPC clinker the clinker is then cooled ground grinded with chipsum to obtain ordinary Portland cement or Portland cement Portland cement. One issue is important right at the beginning just let me introduce here since carbon dioxide is you know calcium carbonate breaks down to calcium oxide plus carbon dioxide. Therefore, you are producing carbon dioxide in addition you are using energy for heating and when you use energy for heating you might be using fossil fuel in some form or other. And people have actually calculated that about 0.74 to 1.25 or 26 tons of carbon dioxide is produced carbon dioxide is produced from one ton of ordinary Portland cement production. So, but on an average you can say that one ton of OPC produces one ton of carbon dioxide which will be an important point of discussion sometime later on because with the concern of global warming and greenhouse gas emission carbon dioxide is one of the greenhouse gases along with water vapor and methane etcetera. This issue has become very very important that cement produces carbon dioxide a greenhouse gas therefore, OPC clinker consumption should be minimized or it should be used as judiciously as possible. So, that is why at the beginning itself I just wanted to point out here which will be discussing sometime later on at some appropriate point of time. So, diagrammatically if I look at this production process diagram if you look at this production process you will have limestone quarring maybe some other raw material you might be adding as fluxes and things like that to control the clinker formation temperature clay or shell this is the other one and this two together both of will be grinded and blended to get an uniform mix of the two and all these are mixed together to get a final blend which I can store somewhere have a raw mill which I can feed now to the pre heater or pre calciner where I will have slight cyclones and it will get heated followed by some of the carbon dioxide will be removed after the pre heater pre heating then it will go to the clean kiln burning clay kiln where once the product is formed this will be mixed with gypsum and grinded by you know finished by grinding. So, this is what the production process of cement clinker looks like right this can be then stored this can be then stored in appropriate manner. If you look at the kiln where you know the feed enters this is dehydration zone where water will move out if there is any free water at 50 degree to 100 degree centigrade at 600 degree centigrade clay decomposes right all exhaust gases go out through this. So, therefore, water vapor will move out along this direction the heat is supplied from here through by burning process you know there is a burners through which you actually supply the heat this zone is somewhere here is the 1500 degree centigrade this incline a little bit so that and there is rotor again. So, it is rotates at 600 degree centigrade clay will decompose then limestone decomposes this is the calcination of the limestone will take place within this zone of 600 to about 1300 degree centigrade and this decomposition of limestone results in carbon dioxide which would go away with the exhaust gas then formation of C 2 S one of the compounds in the cement clinker that takes place and C 3 S forms at somewhat higher temperature this is called clinkering zone and then you cool it the clinker goes out cool to about 60 degree centigrade or so and then later on you can mix up with gypsum very small amount of gypsum and grind it grind it. So, therefore, if I summarize the cement production process cement is produced by burning calcium carbonate found in limestone or chalk right found in limestone or chalk and silica and alumina and iron oxide found in clay or strail at about 1500 degree centigrade 1400 degree centigrade the material centers and partially fuse to form clinker. The clinker is cooled and ground to a fine powder with some gypsum resulting in ordinary Portland cement. Well, one important point is that India is a second largest produce second largest produce of cement after China at the moment. In fact, we have been second largest produce of cement for quite some time with a lot of infrastructure construction going on all across China and India are producing the maximum amount of cement now. In fact, cement is again as I said it is the next material after water which is consumed by human being and of course, India contributes to a large chunk in this production of cement. So, that is what the production process is all about cement production. Let us see the composition now if you if you we can quickly understand that there will be calcium oxide calcium oxide because calcium carbonate burnt to form calcium oxide obviously, I will have SiO 2 and other materials available in clay right Fe 2 O 3 and this is the material that some fluxes which are added so, they will also be there. So, the oxides main oxides composition would be then alkali of course, alkali then other impurities etcetera that will be they are magnesium oxide that would usually be and they are controlled. So, some of them come from the ingredients raw material some come through the process and then the oxide composition oxide composition are controlled depending upon the performance of the cement that you desire right. So, carbon dioxide from the lime is liberated while burning therefore, calcium oxide and SiO 2 would be there and approximate composition limits of the ordinary Portland cement if we look at it generally calcium oxide would be calcium oxide would be 60 to 60 percent. Silicon oxide or SiO 2 is 17 to 25 percent and aluminum oxide is 3 to 8 percent iron oxide it should be Fe 2 O 3 Fe 2 O 3 the 2 should be subscript 0.5 to 0.5 to 6 this is controlled alkali is a 0.2 to 1 3 percent SiO 3 is 1 to 3 percent. So, these are the oxide composition of cement these are limits actually given typical limits of oxides given you know in most of the codes all over the world the ordinary Portland cement will have this kind of limits of oxides. Now, these oxides actually formed into solid solutions and formed some compounds while you know clinker formation occurred within the kiln because they are partially melt the compound main compounds those are present in cement are recognized as you know these are the solid solutions they are this compound. 3 SiO SiO 2 2 SiO SiO 2 3 SiO L 2 O 3 and 4 SiO L 2 O 3 and Fe 2 O 3 etcetera etcetera 4 SiO L 2 O 3 Fe 2 O 3 this combined this together etcetera. These compounds we the names will come to them but before that since these are the compounds and you can see their complex compounds actually complex oxides. So, therefore, we do not write in cement chemistry we write do not write them time and again to SiO SiO 2 we abbreviate them. So, oxides are actually abbreviated in cement chemistry or in discussion with respect to cement and SiO we abbreviate as C SiO 2 we abbreviate as S L 2 O 3 and C O 2 C O 2 C O we abbreviate as A and Fe 2 O 3 we abbreviate as F. Well some more abbreviations are something like this although it is not written here but sometime we might be using is H 2 O we abbreviate as H H H 2 O we abbreviate as H. So, the compound water abbreviation similarly SiO 3 we abbreviate as S L 3 because S is already there so we abbreviate as S L 3. So, these two will come sometime later on right. Now, if I use this abbreviation then this compound this compound can be written this compound can be written as C 3 S this compound this compound can be written as C 2 S. So, C 3 C O tri calcium silicate tri calcium silicate we call it di calcium silicate I will come to the name name I have not really mentioned to you tri calcium illuminate. So, we call it C 3 A and this is called tetra calcium aluminum ferrite C 4 A F tetra calcium aluminum ferrite and that is C 4 A F all right. So, this is the abbreviated form of the compounds and now onwards we will be using mostly this and surely not this kind of compound formation. So, let us see the name nomenclature main compounds in Portland cement tri calcium silicate this is this and we abbreviate as C 3 S we also the mineral name is L I. So, it is a mineralogical name is L I. Di calcium silicate is mineralogical name is belite and it is 2 C O S I O 2 or C 2 S. So, L I and belite tri calcium illuminate is 3 C O L 2 O 3 or C 3 A and its mineral name is illuminate the blue colored signifies the mineral name, but its compound name is also tri calcium illuminate tetra calcium aluminum ferrite. So, tetra calcium aluminum ferrite C 4 A F is abbreviation and its mineral name is ferrite. So, L I and belite are the 2 compounds which has got silica and illuminate and ferrite are the compounds where there are alumina and iron present iron and alumina present. Well, it is important then you control the properties of the cement because their performance will depend upon I mean properties of the control the composition of the cement because performance will depend upon the compound composition. We will see that each compound actually behaves differently than the others although it is possibly is very difficult to actually identify directly C 3 A C 2 A S etcetera in cement. If you take cement identifying directly under microscope or something or separating them visually it is not easy although you can identify them through let us say techniques analytical chemical techniques. Now, their properties would be governed by the properties are governed by composition of C 3 A C 2 A S etcetera etcetera. Now, therefore, there are some control ratios lime saturation factor is one of them lime saturation factor is one of them silica ratio and alumina ratio are the two others. So, we shall see that how they control lime saturation factor is defined in this manner this is the calcium oxide divided by 2.88 S I O 2 1.2 A and 0.65 F expressed usually as percentage. So, lime saturation factor is nothing but the ratio of calcium 2 you know some factor multiply you know some 2.8 multiplied by the silica content 1.2 multiplied by the alumina and 0.65 multiplied by the iron F e 2 O 3 expressed as percentage. silica ratio is S divided by S plus F and alumina ratio is A by F. Now, how do they matter if the lime saturation factor is greater than 100 you will have some lime which will remain uncombined free lime. So, it is more than 100 percent right this lime saturation factor more than 100 percent then it results in free lime uncombined lime will be there calcium oxide because you have not too much of lime in the system and it cannot react. So, they will remain as unreacted. So, therefore, the you know compound composition of oxide that is present proportion of oxides various oxides they are very very important. Now, generally it is maintained from 95 to 98 percent lime saturation factor it is maintained 95 to 98 percent higher silica ratio means more C 3 S. So, higher this means more C 3 S less C 3 C 2 S and obviously, C 3 A. So, if you have high silica by you know silica ratio you will get more of this compound less of C 3 A and obviously, less of C 2 S as well as you shall see higher alumina ratio means higher C 3 A. So, higher so supposing I control this proportions then I can control this oxide composition I should be able to control the compound composition in cement and that would result in different performance. So, depending upon performance or type of cement I want to obtain I can control this controlling control ratios in order to get appropriate compound composition of cement. So, compound composition of cement is calculated from oxide composition by an equation called bogs equation. This is an empirical way of determining and this is what it is. C 3 S amount is given as 4.07 C minus 7.60 S minus 6.7 to A 1.43 F and 2.85 this is S O 3 S bar S O 3. So, from this you can find out how much it will be this. So, if you know the oxide composition then you can find out the C 3 S composition. I have a problem with this. So, this is the S O 3 this is S O 3 this is S O 3. So, from this you can find out how much it will be this. So, if you know the oxide composition then you can find out the C 3 S composition approximately approximately using this bogs empirical equation. C 2 S is obtained as 2.87S that is S I O 2 content minus 0.754 C 3 S. So, if you first calculate this then from this you can find out C 2 S and C 3 quantity you can find out from 2.65 aluminum oxide and 1.69 iron oxide C 4 F is found out as 3.04 S. So, this is the amount of carbonate S of course, is S O 3 as I mentioned. So, if you calculate the compound composition from oxide composition then C 3 S typically is something like 54.1 percent and generally this is observed C 3 is 10.8 percent if you take 65 percent from the oxide composition which I have given earlier I have given from that if you calculate out you can calculate out to find that C 3 S might come around 54.1 C 2 S might come somewhere there C 4 F will be there and then minor compounds etcetera etcetera. So, you can obtain the compound composition from oxide composition using bogs equation. This diagram shows you at different stages what are the S I O 2 A F C etcetera like this is limestone then the shell the mix together as 80 20 proportion that comes to the mill then the raw feed to the pre-heater and to the final product is the O P C with 65 percent of calcium oxide 3 percent aluminum 5.6 and S 20.9 percent. So, this shows the stages a various stages the composition of the oxide composition mixture at various stages. This is a phase diagram in fact if we see with temperature the proportion by weight then to start with I have got lime here this is low quartz and the clay minerals iron oxide. Now, S might temperature increases the water has gone out 600 800 degree centigrade carbon dioxide has gone up. So, mass would have reduced total mass would have reduced and C 4 F formation would have started here C 4 F formation would have started here this low quartz changes to high quartz and here free lime started producing from about 700 degree or 600 you know below 700 somewhere close to 700 because lime would have broken down calcium carbonate would have broken down carbon dioxide would have gone. So, free lime would have formed and S I go further C 4 F formation would occur around 1000 1100 or 1200 degree centigrade C 2 this would be this is quartz they will change this is in some liquid state which will solidify later on. Bellite forms here and Lite finally forms around 1400 degree centigrade which we showed earlier also that about 1400 degree centigrade C 3 S is formed that is Lite is formed the light forms earlier and C 4 F forms much earlier at around 700 800 degree centigrade. So, this is the production and composition of cement next is you see when cement reacts with water it produces heat it is an exothermic reaction because philosophically we can understand this will occur we have heated this material up lime and silica I mean play and you know limestone and therefore, finally the product that is formed it is heated and produce at high temperature. Now, this product will have some chemical energy locked up into it because we have given energy to it and therefore, it will have tendency to react and it reacts with water because that is what we have seen that lime and silica you know reacts with water similarly now we have produced it from the raw material of lime and silica and this material the clinker grinded together with gypsum why gypsum I will come to that sometime later on it will react with water readily react with water it will readily react with water right. So, because it has got some chemical energy locked up its chemical potential is high it will readily react with water and give away those energy. So, the reaction is exothermic reaction of exothermic and the process the reaction process we call it hydration process because you know hydration because it adds up water simply it adds up the water. So, it is a hydration in chemistry we call it hydration process where water simply is reacting right getting added. So, it is hydration now in the process of hydration of cement hydration of cement heat is heat evolution takes place. So, heat of hydration occurs and if you see heat of hydration of this pure compound C 2 S C 3 S etcetera we will find that C 4 C 3 A has got the highest value joules per gram 867 or in calorie per gram is 207 C 4 C 3 S has got this is the next highest as 502 joules per gram and this has got 419 this is got least. So, the one which is which gives out maximum heat will have a tendency to react right in the beginning earlier it will react because it has the highest tendency to react. So, C 3 A has got highest tendency to react with water C 3 S will have next highest tendency to react with water this is a small compound but this has the next tendency and this is the compound which will have least tendency to react with water. So, this is what it is so heat of hydration is important from that point of view and we will use this quickly if you look now cement the elements those are presents are oxygen silica calcium aluminum and iron. Components oxides are calcium oxide as I O 2 L 2 F E 2 O 3 alkali etcetera etcetera. Then cement compounds is the form from next stage C 3 S C 2 S C 3 S C 4 A F and from this by combination of this we form various kind of Portland cements then this reacts and form some product which will discuss in the next lecture right. So, summarize if I try to summarize this what we have discussed today first of all we actually introduced concrete as a material and of course, together with it cement based composites because concrete is one material but today concrete is very versatile with cement based composites there are many of them many varieties as I mentioned earlier. So, we actually summarize them you introduce them by name only not going to the details and we also explained we also looked into that concrete is a composite made up of different materials and the property of final product is different than that and also we stated that it is composite and it depends upon the level at which we have to. So, multi level composites it is at the highest level of course, macro homogenous as we go it becomes a composite next level final level it still becomes composite etcetera etcetera. Then we looked into the cement production process we looked into the concrete material looked into the cement production process right. So, we looked into the components of concrete as well natural aggregates cements and cement is you know other other material and water at mixtures and then come then we looked into cement production process and then we looked into composition of cement. We will next follow we will next follow in the next lecture we will look into the process of reaction of cement with water which we call as hydration product hydration process and the product that is formed both in physical changes that occurs because cement and water when you add together it forms a plastic paste and then it solidifies as the reaction of the process and then we will look into the product that is formed hardened product in the next class right. So, thank you very much. === Lecture 2 Transcript === Welcome to module 1. Lecture 2. We will follow up from where we stop last time, but generally we will be following this time structure of cement compound. Then we will look at structure and hydration, main chemical reaction, hydration process and bonding action. So, we will be looking this time to structure of cement compound after briefly looking at where we ended last class. We will look into hydration product and their structure, main chemical process of hydration and the bonding action. Remember last time we looked into schematic representation of the formation of hydration of Portland cement. We said that we start from element oxygen, silicon, calcium, alumina and iron which forms oxides, calcium oxide, SiO2, silicon oxide and aluminum oxide that is silica and alumina, aluminum oxide and iron oxide. Then this follows from the oxides the compounds of cement and their C3A, C2A, C3A, C4A, F. All these combination gives us Portland cement of various type and when hydration occurs in presence of water, it gives us 2 products CHS gel and calcium hydroxide. So, far we have not looked into this. So last class we stopped somewhere there and we talk of also just heat of hydration. We said that out of all these compounds C3S produces 500 joules per gram, C2S 260 joules per gram and C3A, C67 joules per gram and C4A, F419. Corresponding calorie per gram is also given side by side. So, this is what we looked into in the last class. Now we will follow in this class, we look into structure of compounds of cement. Now you see silica Si silica, you know just Si silica belongs to same group as carbon in periodic table in same group. And if you recall that they have 4 electrons in the same group, we have 4 electrons in the same group. So, electrons in their outer shell and this silica, generally you know this silicon, this silicon therefore, combine with 4 oxygen, combine with 4 oxygen forming SiO4 ion with 4 negative balance. So, since it has got 4 electron, those 4 electron can combine 4 oxygen covalently and this will have it will be SiO4 4 negative ions. Silica is SiO2, we know that silica is SiO2. So, this has got a tetrahedral structure with SiO4 and Si covalently bonded with 4 oxygen, this is the basic repeating unit in structure of silica and silicate. So, that is the fundamental. Now you know cement is calcium silicate, try calcium silicate and di calcium silicate etcetera we have seen, it is also illuminate. So, first we are trying to look at the silica structure. So, silica has a tetrahedral structure like this, the silicon here there are 4 oxygen atom, they are covalently bonded with silica Si silicon atom and it is 4 negative, it has got you know 4 negative balances existing, it can you know 4 negative 4 negative balances exist in this one. The structure of silica therefore, is something like this, the blue one is the silicon with the red ones the oxygen here of course, the yellow one is the silicon and this 4 other oxygen. So, you can see that they repeat itself and each oxygen is combined with 2 silicon, there is one silicon here another silicon here each oxygen is combined, it combines with 2 silicon and this process this repeats, this repeats this repeats itself. And therefore, you know with 1 silica, 1 oxygen half of it is connected to a silica and half is connected to another silica. Therefore, therefore, therefore, therefore, you know each oxygen is connected to 2 silica. So, if there are 4 of this one 4 of the oxygen combined with 1 silicon, since oxygen combines with 2 silicon each. So, therefore, structure of SiO 2 would be repetition, you know repetition of this tetrahedra. So, this tetrahedra on repetition forms SiO 2 or compound silica compound silica compound silica. So, in silica it is a 3 D network of tetrahedra formed 3 D network of tetrahedra formed by the oxygen bonded to SiO. So, this is a SiO 2 structure or silica structure. Crystalline quartz is one of the silica, crystalline quartz one of the most stable silica, the tetrahedra are arranged in 3 dimensional periodic pattern. This you know in crystalline quartz the tetrahedra this tetrahedra SiO 4 with 4 negative bond available is arranged in 3 dimensional periodic pattern in 3 dimensional periodic pattern. In non crystalline silica tetrahedra are randomly bonded in non crystalline silica tetrahedra are randomly bonded tetrahedra this R 2. So, this is the silica structure, this is the silica structure. Now, in cement, in cement basically in cement silica can combine in cement actually silica can combine with it can combine with other oxides in 3 dimensional network of silica. Other oxides can be dissolved to a number of crystalline and non crystalline silica. So, in your SiO 4 structure SiO 4 structure 3 dimensional network SiO 4 3 dimensional network other oxides can get dissolved and they can combine and therefore, you can get both crystalline as well as non crystalline materials as products various kind of silica. Now, cement is one such example. So, cement is the example of such non silicate cement is example of such you know silica combining it ox other oxides other oxides silica in 3 dimensional network of silica other oxides forms cement that is why I have got tri calcium silicate and di calcium silicate. So, essentially this is the silicate structure of SiO 4 this repeats and in between you will have calcium and oxygen you know atoms coming in and forming the structure of tri calcium silicate and di calcium silicate. Let us look further into it more into it let us look more into it let us look more into it the structure of compounds of cement. So, C 3 S is built up from calcium ion SiO 4 ion tetrahedron orthosilica as it is called orthosilicate and oxygen ions just being bonded you know last this is bonded to this oxygen ions have bonded to 6 calcium ions like this something like this you know this SiO 4 tetrahedron connected by calcium ions. So, in structure of C 3 S is built up of calcium ions SiO 4 tetrahedron and oxygen ions. So, these are bonded to calcium ions and SiO 4 tetrahedron are connected by calcium ions let us see how it is let us see how it is. C 3 S is also called its mineralogical name is a light which you have seen earlier it is a solid solution it is a solid solution so, combining all this calcium oxygen and SiO 4 tetrahedron. But it has also got some minor compounds like sodium oxide, potassium oxide etcetera etcetera. So, those minor compounds magnesium oxides they are there generally it exhibits a polymorphic structure polymorphic structures and defore structurally by minor deformations of basic hexagonal structure. So, it has got a basic hexagonal structure it is polymorphic not the same crystal structure polymorphic the morphology differs more than one morphology exists and all this morphology differs from the basic hexagonal structure by minor deformations by minor deformations by minor deformations right by minor deformations right. So, let us look further into this delta calcium silicate hydrate or a light structures you see this has got sub shell if this is you know this one are the calcium ions I sorry ortho silicate ion that is SiO 4 this is SiO 4 negative ortho silicate ion oxide ion and calcium ion they are arranged in sub shell like this. So, this is your ortho silicate ion the calcium ions calcium calcium ions and in this one you have got oxygen ions right and this combines together to form full shell with sub shell A B A B etcetera etcetera. So, a light has got a structure that is C 3 S has got a structure of this kind structure with small calcium ions an ortho silicate ion surrounding them in the manner as shown. Simplified bellite structure if I look at that is C 2 S which you call mineralogical name is bellite which you have seen in the last class. So, structure of C 2 S that is bellite involves calcium ion and ortho silicate ion and exhibit polymorphism like a light. So, structure of C 2 S bellite it also involves calcium ion ortho silicate ion and exhibit same polymorphism like a light, but obviously the structure should be different. Bellite also of course, is solid solutions containing minor quantities of other oxides like sodium oxide potassium oxide alkalis and magnesium oxides and so on. So, the other compound other minor compounds are there in small quantities in bellite as well in bellite as well. So, this also is a solid solution minor quantities of other oxides are present in structure of bellite as well and if you look at it same it will look like this this ortho silicate ion is here and this is the calcium ions calcium ions with ortho silicate ion plays like this. So, this is the structure of C 2 S if you look at structure of aluminate it has got one difference it does not exhibit polymorphism it does not exhibit polymorphism right. So, does not exhibit polymorphism it has got a cubic structure of AL 6 O 18 with ion with 18 negative valency. So, cubic structure is built from calcium ions it has got a cubic structure the aluminate cubic structure built from calcium ions and ring of 6 AL 4 tetrahedra of this formula. Let us see this let us see this one if this is oxygen and aluminum L 6 O 18 tetrahedra is something like this the oxygen is here connected to aluminum smaller aluminum. So, 1 2 3 4 5 6 of them should be there 1 2 and that should be 6. So, AL 6 with O 18 O 18 6 AL with O 18 are connected in this manner forming AL 6 O 18 right structure is something like this now this is connected to calcium ion this is connected to calcium ion in case of aluminate. So, unit cell actually is composed of 64 subs cells out of which 8 are occupied by AL 6 O 18 brings and calcium ions are you know they occur at the body center of some of the remaining subs cells and corners of the other. So, aluminate structure is of something like this right aluminate structure of this well it is it has got AL 6 O 18 rings it has got AL 6 O 18 rings calcium ions occur at the body centers of some of those subs cells and in case of some of the other subs cells it occurs at the corners. So, 64 subs cells are there. So, essentially calcium ion and AL 6 O 18 the rings of this ones are there and calcium ions are placed at the body center position for some of them and remaining subs cells and you know in remain for remaining subs cells it remains at the this remains at the corner. So, structure of ferrite if I look at it it has got calcium ion AL F O 4 tetrahydra and F E O L O 6 tetrahydra and look something like this these are the calcium blue ones are the calcium the red triangles are the AL F O 4 and F E L O 6 are the water and water ones of this kind black ones are the AL F E L O 6. So, they have a structure something of this kind. So, that is how the structure of compounds of cement or the you know a light, belight, aluminate and ferrite looks light. Now, what is important for us from this point of view is one feature which is common in all this structure is that the large anions are bonded with small size cations calcium cations you know your cations are cations cations are calcium anions are Si O 4 minus 4 AL 6 O 18 minus 18 etcetera. So, you can see the sizes of this anions are very large cations are small calcium cations. So, this is one common feature and this has a role in its chemical reaction with water. So, this is one major feature common feature for all these chemicals which is important from our point of view is that it has got small cations that is calcium ions with large anions. We of course, know that it is difficult to identify this individual minerals in the cement through conventional technique. If you take cement by conventional technique it is difficult to identify this chemical compounds you cannot just separate out one from the other they are all together. Now, this when mixed with water or comes in contact with water it reacts let us see why does it react the purpose of discussing about the structure is the structure as a role in its chemical reaction with water. We call this reaction as hydration, but in general hydration is a term used is a process of formation of hydrates. It is used in the context of process of formation of hydrates hydrates are salts or compounds associated with water of crystallization. So, hydrates are salts or compounds associated with water of crystallization that means, cement when it comes in contact with water takes water of crystallization and becomes hydrates. Therefore, we say hydration of cement that is why you say hydration of cement hydration reaction of cement right. Hydration is a general term used in chemistry this why does it happen why hydrates are some of the some of the ions you know some some compounds show exhibit or chemically combined with water to form hydrates. Well, because an ions are too large compared to the cat ions to the size of available cat ions such that the packing efficiency of the compound will not come within the range of required stability. You see cat ions are small an ions are large cat ions are arranged with the an ions in some manner. Now, if the size are too small they do not pack with appropriate packing density. Now, what is packing density which we talk about later on also is the volume of solid divided by volume total volume volume of solids divided by total volume. So, the cat ions and an ions must pack such that they occupy 64 to 74 percent of the volume to have a stable structure. When cat ions are small an ions are large the space between the an ions are not filled completely by the cat ion therefore, the packing density is not the stable packing density. And when you do not have a stable packing density you know they actually take water well Siemens belongs to this kind of compounds because your cat ions are small calcium cat ions are small and calcium cat ions are small and this small calcium cat ions with large an ions the packing is not a stable packing packing density is not stable. And in such situation what happens? To require to achieve this required packing efficiency the unstable compounds incorporated compounds incorporated water of crystallization within their structure in order to fill the space left around the cat ion. So, to achieve this required efficiency these compounds where cat ions are small an ions are large they incorporate water of crystallization within their structure in order to fill the space left around the cat ion. And Siemens is like this right Siemens is like this. So, cat ion is then artificially enlarged so that stability is achieved crystallization occurs stability is achieved right by crystallization so cat ions is then artificial enlarge. So, therefore, you can see that why Siemens readily take water and react with water it takes quickly it gets hydrated because its cat ion sizes are small and an ion sizes are large therefore, it can readily you know take water and react with water and water of crystallization and hydrates are formed. Hydrated water has got the property that it is chemically bound it is chemically bound in the structure at therefore, not available for process such as fungal growth. This is not freely available these water is not freely available it is not available for fungal growth it is attached chemically it is attached chemically right. So, it is not available for fungal growth you want to remove this water, we want to remove this water high temperature is required high temperature is required to remove this chemically bound water of crystallization from the structure, because it is now chemically bound. So, you cannot remove them so easily. So, you have to heat it up, supply a lot of energy to detach this water out from the system, out from the hydrated system. This water is also not physically detectable by a moisture meter. That means, it does not you know you just cannot measure them simply it is a part of the solid system. And if you put a moisture meter like let us say electrical conductivity etcetera, etcetera this is not readily detectable by any kind of moisture meter that you have it will not evaporate. If you heat 200 degree centigrade it will not evaporate, because it is much more strongly blown bound than the free water. Ions are usually formed from covalently or ionically bonded structures. And compounds of cement have large anions with small cations, thus high affinity for hydration. So, that is what we have understood that in cement we have got large anions and small cations. So, it readily can readily hydrates that is why it readily hydrates and from the hydrated structures. So, that is why the structure of cement compounds were important you know, because to understand that they are anions are large cations are small and therefore, they can readily hydrate. And it is therefore, you know we now understand also process of hydration and that is why cement reacts. Now, main chemical reaction if you look at it we abbreviate like we abbreviate calcium oxide as C water we abbreviate as H as we mentioned earlier water is abbreviated as H, thus calcium hydroxide will be written as CH. Calcium hydroxide will be written as CH. So, C 3S reacts with 6 water 2 C 3S reacts with 6 water this is the typical reaction forming calcium silicate hydrate the water goes into the calcium silicate structure and calcium hydroxide. So, it produces calcium hydroxide and the calcium silicate hydrate similarly, bellite or C 2S also reacts forming calcium silicate hydrate and calcium hydroxide. One can note this that it produces more calcium hydroxide, C 3S produces more calcium hydroxide then C 2S 100 grams of C 3S reacts with approximately 24 grams of water to produce the 75 grams of C S you know C 3S 2H 3 and 49 grams of CH 100 grams almost reacts with 24 grams producing 99 and 22 grams of calcium hydroxide. So, this is these are the two most important reaction. Now, this is we you know we there is a reason why we call it as a CH CS H rather than you know compound complete formula will come to that shortly. This has got a gel like structure and this is responsible for bonding. So, this is got a gel like structure and responsible for bonding will come to that in more details. The next chemical reaction important one is of course, C 3A reacting with 6 water forming calcium aluminate hydrate C 3A H 6 this is this is the typical reaction. But, one more your reaction which is important is reaction of C 3A with calcium sulphate with water of crystallization. Now, what is this calcium oxide and SO 3 because SO 3 is abbreviated as S bar and then 2 H 2 O. So, this is nothing but can C A SO 4 2 H 2 O gypsum. This gypsum is added to the cement as we have mentioned earlier that gypsum is added to the cement to control setting in the last lecture we talked about that. Now, this calcium sulphate or gypsum you know hydrated calcium sulphate reacts with C 3A readily reacts with C 3A and forms a compound of this kind C 6 A alumina aluminum oxide S 3 bar that is SO 3 and H 32. So, C 3A reacts C 3A reacts C 3A reacts with gypsum in presence of water to form this kind of a compound and this is called etringide this is called etringide there is a name etringide this is called etringide. So, this reaction forms but, this is not a very stable compound and later on it changes in presence of C 3A and water to what is called monosulfate to what is called monosulfate S bar only not S 3. So, this is called monosulfate. So, these 2 reactions are also important in case of hydrogen of cement earlier 2 reactions and this alumina reactions alumina reactions we have seen here. So, these are the main chemical reactions for cement with water gypsum is added to the gypsum control setting properties we will discuss this sometime later on. What happens is if you do not have gypsum then C 3A quickly reacts with water and can results in what is called flash set and too much of gypsum on the other hand can result in what is known as false set will come to that. So, C 3A H C cubic crystalline and the reaction is that it leads to flash set of cement as a whole and it is not desirable because this flash set do not allow C 3A and C 2A to react it quickly solidifies you know kind of a very short period and it is not desirable because other reactions do not continue. So, flash set is not desirable and that is why we add gypsum in the cement. Now gypsum essentially delays the reaction by forming a train jet layer on surface setting takes place by formation of CHS later on. So, this is what it does gypsum it delays the reaction right by forming a train jet we look into this somewhat in more details from time to time and setting takes place by formation of CHS too much gypsum is also not good too much gypsum is again not good because it results in what is known as false set it results in what is known as false sets like this flash set like flash set like flash set of pair is because gypsum itself will react with water and form hydrated gypsum you know like like flash set of pair is and therefore, this is also not desirable this is called false set. But you can actually you know remix it a little bit and it will set again. So, both optimal quantity of gypsum is important gypsum should be able to return the reaction of C 3 A. So, that CHS you know or C 3 S C 2 S can react but at the same time too much of gypsum might solidify it by reacting itself with water instead of C 3 alone and thus by giving impression of a false set. So, anyway this is this again we may look into this sometime later let us come back to. So, we have seen the chemical reactions or reaction product of the cement this a we have seen that silicate hydro calcium silicate hydrates let us look at their structure because this structures have some role in their properties and things like that in understanding their properties and you know hydration process itself. So, let us look at structure of CHS exact chemical structure of C S C S H is complicated and exhibit variable composition hence we call it C S H that is why there is a you know there is a reason we said that it has got a gel like structure it has got a gelatinous structure gel it in a structure. But we said that you know we do not denoted by the exact formula because it has got variable formula. So, we generally denoted by C S H denoted by C S H the it is not actually crystalline as we shall see C S H is not crystalline right it is not crystalline we look into it and therefore, the crystal structure of C S H is not really defined instead we talk of nano structure of C H S at a very fine level. So, this C H S gel show no long range order hence largely amorphous this do not show no long range order. Therefore, amorphous a reputation of the structure is not there therefore, it is largely amorphous several different morphological types of C H S have been identified based on evaluation technique. There are number of they have you know similarity to some of those calcium silicate hydrates pure calcium silicate hydrates produced otherwise not from the cement namely to warmer right or similar ones there are several minerals crystalline structure they but the C S H produce from cement they do not have long range crystalline structure. So, therefore, they are largely amorphous cannot be cannot be associated or cannot be assumed to represent such crystals as to be right. So, they are essentially amorphous right and the product that you you know you find out the crystal structure they will determine if usually it depends upon the evaluation technique. Well, it actually reaction of cement with water results in precipitation of colloidal gelatinous mass and this forms a network this forms a network this forms a network cement comes in contact with water hydration reaction takes places the surface and reaction product is formed at the surface itself. So, we have we have a diagram we have a course diagram which I will come to. So, what happens is the reaction takes place at the surface cement particles well there may be clog but if you can disperse them if they are separated from each other right. So, the water when it comes in contact with the water surface and the reaction takes place at the surface and products are deposited at the surface because water comes in. Now, next what will happen the product of course, is colloidal and gelatinous colloidal and gelatinous and it forms a coating on the surface of the cement itself it forms a coating on the surface of the cement itself and this coating x like a semi permeable membrane it x like a forms a coating on the surface and x like a semi permeable membrane. Now, on the grain size on the cement side of this semi permeable membrane there is more concentration of the solute that is the cement itself and on the other side there is less concentration of the solute. So, when you have difference in concentration you know across a semi permeable membrane it gives rise to osmotic pressure will come to that sometime later on will come to that sometime later on when you talk you know at appropriate time we we know that if there is a difference of concentration exist across a semi permeable membrane you find that after sometime concentration tend to be same after sometime concentration tend to be same because a pressure difference exists between the higher concentration side and the lower concentration side and this pressure is osmotic pressure will talk about this because we will be talking about diffusion of chloride into concrete and so on in the connection of durability. So, anyway at the moment we understand that there will be an osmotic pressure created on the grain size and that will result in rupture, breakage of the semi permeable membrane and water will penetrate water you know water will penetrate into the unhydrated portion of the cement right it will penetrate into unhydrated portion of the cement and thereby hydrogen reaction would progress. So, concentration of solute is high on the grain side of the gel compared to solution outside resulting in osmotic pressure resulting in osmotic pressure and after induction time the osmotic pressure ruptures the membrane that is what I am saying and water comes in contact to the unhydrated portion of the grain causing hydration product to progress both inwards and outwards into the voids between the grains. So, this osmotic pressure that is higher on the grain side causes rupture of the membrane and thereby water can enter into the you know inside through the membrane to unhydrated cement and reaction product will be formed inside both inside some of it will go outside and actually get deposited into the vacant space that is available and also within the space where original cement grain outer periphery of the original cement grain itself. When product between each grain march so when the march together you know they will they will touch each other the setting would it will form a solid skeleton or what we call setting would occur you know. So, this product will diagrammatically will explain this again so when this product they come and touch each other they form the solid network you know touch each other they will form the solid network with of course void space inside and that time when the solid network has form it is actually we call it the setting has occurred because setting is the process of solidification of cement water plastic mix. So, thus due to the reaction solids would form they would touch each other and thereby the solid network would form and that setting would occur further then process of more generation of solids might take place more hydration product may form and fill in all the voids that is you know that is available within the space right. So, when product between each grain march setting occurs due to lack of water as the system becomes closely packed and the then hydrating would occur. By addition of water to cement a plastic space is prepared that is what we said due to chemical solution water is consumed and paste tends to solidify this process is setting solid then hydrants and gain strength. So, setting is solidification it does not gain strength at that strength sufficient strength at that moment and then gradually it will gain strength as well it will gain strength as well. What we call the first phase of first phase of this solidification it coincides with chemically dormant period we call it chemically dormant stage chemically dormant stage and complete solidification on formation of definite shape and volume refers to final setting that means, a solid has got a definite shape and volume. So, when cement and water mixed when you mix cement and water it forms a plastic kind of a paste this gradually solidifies and when it attains a definite volume and shape fully solid we call it final setting as final setting is occur. Well physical changes as we can see addition of water we get plastic and workable paste this is chemically we call it as dormant stage and it then solidifies such that if you disturb it further at this stage after this stage then it will lose some of its property. So, that state we call as initial set you know it has solidified in such a manner that it is not fully solid still soft not fully solid you can if you press possibly you can make a small dent it is not fully solid but if you try to disturb it further you know it is nearly solid if you try to disturb it further its properties will be affected. So, that is what is initial set generally around minimum should be half an hour and usually could be 45 minutes right could be 45 minutes or so. Not from this is the stiff and unworkable paste stiff and unworkable paste that means it has become a fully solid. So, it is stiff and unworkable paste you know and that is corresponds to final set as I was saying now it has got a definite shape and a volume and therefore that is final set. So, that is the final set. So, it has got a definite shape and volume and it is final set followed by them is rigid solid gaining strength with time and this process we call as hardening. So, it will gradually gain strength it will become now hard the solid is there it was soft initially not very strong but with time then it will gain strength and will become stronger that process we call as hardening. So, this is the physical changes in case of hydration well peak of temperature occurs 6 to 7 hours after mixing the water and final set generally this time corresponds to about 10 hours or so not more than 10 hours that is most of the code will specify most of the code will specify not more than 10 hours. Now, if you look at hydration process you can consider just as small portion of water like this you know it is a water like this and let us say this is my cement grain. Cement grain as you know it is a crushed product it is grinded therefore, it will not have a rounded shape it will have some sort of irregular shape as we can see. So, it will have some sort of irregular shape I can idealize this as a circle something like this right. So, cement shape or something like this idealize it to a circle now let us say hydration proceeds. So, as the hydration proceeds you see the product that would be form this portion has been actually this cement has been consumed the water comes from outside the hydration proceeds means water has reacted with the cement from outer surface. Now, as you know the product of hydration actually has got a density lower than density lower than it has got a density you know density of cement is 3.15 density of cement. We shall see that product and water has got one water density. Now, it has reacted and formed a product this will have a density more than you know less than 3.15 more than one somewhere in between. So, it occupies more volume then the volume that was occupied by the cement. So, therefore, you find that these spaces are also filled with solid. So, some water has reacted and you know the product has gone outside the periphery. The one which has remained within the original boundary we call it as inner product we call it as inner product inner product we call it as inner product. So, inner product is that product which is produced within the original grain boundary inner product is the hydration product which is produced within the original grain boundary. Let me repeat cement has got a specific gravity of 3.15 water has got a specific gravity of one the product form has a specific gravity somewhat less than 3.15 smaller than 3.15 but more than one. So, the new solid that is formed occupies more volume then the original volume of the cement. So, some product will be produced within that zone where original cement was there and water has entered and produce the hydration product that product we call as inner product and some product will be formed outside this and we call it outer product. Now, outer product obviously will have CHS but it will also have some calcium hydroxide it will have also calcium either. So, this once this once you know precipitates precipitates are calcium hydroxide. So, these are these precipitates are calcium hydroxide. So, calcium hydroxide precipitates as because it is sparingly soluble it is sparingly soluble you know. So, it remains as precipitate non ceiling precipitate non ceiling does not seal anything non ceiling precipitate whereas, outer product CHS will be something like this you know in the periphery of the original grain boundary. So, they will extend outside right and calcium hydroxides are precipitated outside right and unhydrated cement still remains inside. Let us say further reaction starts occurring. So, unhydrated cement now gets reduced and CHS outer product now increases to a large scale and you will still have this once this calcium hydroxide precipitates outside. But the black portion if it is now stop the hydration stop black portion represents blank space which are nothing but they will remain as pores blank space which will remain as pores. So, black you know they have become black from the blue water finally, the water is evaporated and that has become pores right. So, that is what we call as capillary pores their sizes are large and therefore, we call them as capillary pores. So, this diagram explains you the process of hydration taking from an idealized cement particle taking considering an idealized cement particles surrounded by water. Now, when this solids as we have seen all the solids that touch each other at some corner or somewhere the solids skeleton is formed touch each other from the other side another particle and so on solids skeleton is formed. But remember there will large pores large quantity of pores remaining at the initial stage unless you have less water very little water less space to be filled by the solid products of hydration and the continuous reaction progresses over a long period of time. We will look into this in some more details later on right. So, if I look at now the look at now the structural changes that occurs in case of hydration on the y axis I have quantities of material on the y axis I have quantities of material on this side and x axis time initially it is in seconds and minutes etcetera etcetera etcetera initially it is in minutes then it is in hours then it is in days. Now, there are different products which are forming as you can see for example, this product if you look at it it is a train jide you know this is a train jide. So, it is a train jide formation occurs. So, a train jide is a first one to be produced it it is produced but if you remember I said that it is not very stable. So, a train jide is the first one which is formed but it is not very stable. So, after certain period of time it gets converted into it gets converted into monosulfate it gets converted into monosulfate. So, this is the monosulfate it gets converted into monosulfate. So, first thing that is formed is a train jide CHS starts forming from about 1 to 2 hours you know sorry 7 to 8 hours I mean sorry not 1 2 3 hours etcetera etcetera not 6 7 6 7 hours is here. So, it starts feeling after some period of time and then CHS would be produced in this manner different types of structural changes occurs from long fibers to you know the fibers form long fibers to short fibers formation will occur and calcium hydroxide is also produced. So, this axis is volume or amount and you can see calcium hydroxide volume or quantity increases with time as the hydration progresses CHS long fiber initially form then the short far by they will stabilize as short fiber calcium hydroxide is formed but a train jide is formed in the beginning it attains a peak but then its concentration starts coming down because they get converted into monosulfate it is not stable get converted into monosulfate and C 4 a f hydrates are formed there which is not very important. So, we can see that the product those are form is first is a train jide then CHS and a train jide gets converted into monosulfate calcium hydroxide produces together with the CHS and monosulfate concentration increases simultaneously volume of force will go on reducing initially most of large quantity will be water and this will go on reducing because this solids will occupy the spaces that was originally filled by water. So, dormant period as I mentioned chemically dormant period is actually a train jide reaction setting occurs when CHS starts forming right and then hardening is this period of time in days setting is in hours hardening is days and if you go back to the same structure initially it was something like this particles and water next stage at this stage between dormant stage and setting the fibers of CHS etcetera started forming precipitates of calcium hydroxide would have started coming out after that and here the lot of this fibers would have formed lot of solid would have formed and lastly as the hardened structure would look something like this hardened structure would look something like this. So, this is the hydration process you know and the structure is changes that occurs in cement when it mixes with water when we just it comes in contact with water we have seen the chemical reaction and physically how the hydration process occurs that we have seen and just now we have seen the you know with time how different products are formed how different products are formed. So, that is what the hydration process is well the hardened phase structure if we look from back scattered electron microscopy back scattered electron microscopy image unhydrited phase you can see that you can see the unhydrited phase here right and pores are the black ones in fact, these all are pores because we have separated out by binary separation all the black ones from rest of the color. So, these are the structure of the pores by binary separation and the gray color the white one is unhydrited cement in fact, calcium hydroxide is also white largely white color and gray color is hydrated phase that is your hydration product etcetera. Calcium hydroxide of course, remains as precipitates surrounding aggregate or summer they remain as non-silling precipitate. So, back scattered electron microscopy confirms the you know the process that I was talking about in fact, it is from this ideas of electron microscopy and back scattered electron microscopy the process of hydration model that I showed actually has been developed actually has been developed based on this kind of ideas. For example, if you look at electron microscope right this they look this is a possibly calcium hydroxide the hydration hydrated product will be something like this unhydrited product might look something like this right. So, now we have seen the structure we can come to the bonding action will repeat of course, bonding action will just initiate today, but we will continue to do it in the next class again is it CHS gel has large specific surface and it is of the order of 2 to 3 into 10 to the power 6 centimeter square per gram. I have not defined the specific surface as yet we will actually tell you how to measure specific surface of cement it is the surface area per unit mass. Of course, we measure it in certain manner by certain techniques now specific surface of CHS gel is very very high and it is about you know you can see that it is possibly about 1000 times more than that of cement because it is 2 to 3 into 10 to the power 6 centimeter square and where it is 2 point 2 into 10 to the power 3 to 4 into 10 to the power 3. So, this 10 to the power 3 this 10 to the power 6. So, order is 1000 times. So, therefore, you know particle sizes are colloidal size very small particle size you take in terms of particle. So, they are very fine sizes and therefore, surface forces starts acting or dominating surface forces start acting and dominating and the surface forces which are intermolecular in nature of the order of around 7 MPA are responsible for cementing action of gel to gel. So, gel to gel cementing action is because of intermolecular forces what is called bender walls forces will come to that. So, intermolecular forces are those that act between stable molecules or between functional groups between macro molecules or between molecules. So, they are called intermolecular forces within the molecule it is covalent, electrovalent bonds, but between molecules there are certain intermolecular forces and gel to gel bond attraction is intermolecular in nature this is not chemical bond from gel to gel because gel is CHS another CHS there is intermolecular forces between CHS gel system right. So, bonding action of this intermolecular forces they are generally weak not chemical bond not very strong we have seen that it is about 7 MPA of the order of this, but actual bond could be possibly more than that. Well, cement to cement bond is because of this now we will understand this a little bit more in the next class by you know by understanding the nature of this kind of intermolecular forces a little bit more will go into the fundamentals of this a little bit more what causes this forces in material and then we will follow it up for bonding action of cement. So, we will follow it up for bonding. So, I think we should summarize it right now we will summarize our discussion at the stage the rest of the bonding we will discuss in the next class summarizing this for today's discussion would be we have looked into structure of structure of we have looked into structure of compounds structure and hydration process structure of hydration process and somewhat we looked into the structure hydration product and the processes involved and we have also introduced you bonding action bonding action right. So, what we have looked therefore, we have first looked into structure of the cement compounds and one thing we have identified that they are large anions with small cations. So, therefore, they are not stable and can you know stable this crystalline structure is not stable because packing density is not stable packing density. Therefore, like many others compounds or salts they actually react with water or take water around the cation to form a kind of stable structure cement is of the similar kind and that is why they react with water. Now, basic structure of the cement compounds come from silica structure S I O 4 and that is why they absorb water we have looked into the hydration process and the product that is formed that being very fine surface forces dominate and that is why you have bonding between gel to gel which is not very strong but somewhat strong in the next class we will look into this bonding action and more to the physical structure of the cement hydrates. Thank you. === Lecture 3 Transcript === Welcome to module 1. Lecture 3. We shall be starting from where we have stopped that is bonding action. Then, we shall look into heat of hydration and compound contribution to strength. Then, we will look into degree of hydration followed by hardened paste structure models and obviously from that we will calculate out porosity. Now, last class we are mentioning that CHS gel has large specific surface. It has a gelatine structure and large specific surface and the order of this specific surface is 1000 times more than that of the cement. You can see that it is 2 2 3 into 10 to the power 6 centimeter square per gram compared to that of cement which has 2.25 or 4 into 10 to the power 3. The surface forces therefore, will dominate because the surface area is so large surface forces will dominate. Now, and just as an example one can think of say if I have large size particle like stones they are not bonded. You know stones you can separate out very easily. Sand well you can separate out quite easily come to clay the surface area is very large because particles are small. We shall see that surface area is inversely proportional to specific surface surface area part unit volume if I say it will be inversely proportional to the particle diameter. So, if my particle diameters become smaller specific surface becomes large. So, in case of clay specific surfaces very large therefore, you cannot separate clay out they stick together. The cement gel is very fine gelatineous particle and therefore, very large surface area like clay the intermolecular forces tend to hold them together. So, surface forces which are intermolecular in nature you know they are intermolecular in nature. They are of the order of around 7 m p a are responsible for cementing action of gel to gel. So, you cannot separate out gel from gel because there are intermolecular forces. This intermolecular forces what are they? The intermolecular forces is the force that act between stable molecules or functional groups or functional groups or between functional groups of macro molecules. So, they are they act between molecules or functional groups you know electrovalent or covalent bonds are between atoms to form the molecule. This forces acts between the molecule they put the molecule together they act between the molecule. So, bonding action between the molecule those are the intermolecular forces and in cement gel this intermolecular forces held gel with gel together. The weakest of this intermolecular forces are vendor walls forces you know weakest of this intermolecular forces are vendor walls forces they are also known as London dispersion forces. Essentially they include momentary attraction between molecules, diatomic free elements and individual atoms. So, that is momentary attractions right. They essentially differ the differ from covalent and ionic bonding which are between atoms whereby either charge transfer takes place or sharing of electron takes place that is essentially electron transfer takes place or sharing of electron occurs that is that is for between atoms to form compounds. Now, these are or to form molecules now this these ones are intermolecular forces. So, they differ from those covalent and ionic bonding because these are not stable bonds and are caused by momentary polarization of particles momentary polarization. So, vendor wall bonds thus residual bonds result from separation of electric charges. So, electric charges which get separated they form residual bond because of the separation of electric charges you know in many covalent molecules the outer shell electrons are shared and therefore, the charges the you know center of positive and negative charges they may not coincide from dipole and this may results in kind of bonding forces between molecules and these are the forces which are responsible. Similar forces are responsible for bonding gel to gel for example, in case of gas molecule like hydrogen H 2 there are two H atoms or oxygen etcetera. Electron in the covalent bond of H and H electron in the covalent bond of H and H are concentrated in the bond direction and resultant positive and negative charges separation occurs. So, along the direction of the bond electrons are concentrated thus dipole is formed. So, that is what is wherever dipole is formed you might find intermolecular forces or vendor wall forces acting bond with hydro carbons is covalent that is between say carbon to carbon in a hydro carbon these are covalent right. But between adjacent high hydro carbons the bonds are vendor wall type for example, if you have carbon carbon chains these are all covalent bonds but if I have two such chains you know in polymers 5 years for example, then that case the bond between these two would be intermolecular type intermolecular type you know like the vendor wall bond. So, they are bonded by this kind of action they are bonded by weak forces. So, CHS gel has got this sort of bond which are not strong chemical bond but vendor wall kind of bond and gel to gel separation requires breaking those vendor wall bond right. Many other materials do not have any bond at all for example, sand particles between sand particles there are no forces of attraction which are holding them together or stones large surface area small surface area compared in per unit mass or per unit volume the forces do not act right. So, this vendor wall bonds are mechanically very weak and they are elastically deformable exhibit poor conductivity of the resulting material. So, the material where the vendor wall bonds are there they are elasticly that means, if you apply load they are they will deform and may come back to its original position and they have poor conductivity and CHS gel will be like that generally CHS gel is stable in water. Now, vendor wall bond or 7 MP intermolecular forces cannot be the only force which is bonding them but by and large this is the force. So, stability of hardened paste in water indicates there is somewhat something more than just 7 MP a intermolecular forces which holds them but nevertheless that is the major cause or major force understood to have been you know responsible for strength of gel to gel. Structure of gel is essentially thin sheets 15 to 100 nanometer layers thick that is what it is you know we will have a diagram people have actually determined by some test and their structure these are thin sheet like structures 15 to 100 nanometer layer thick. So, they this has been determined by various indirect test. Now, proximity of the surface atom can also give rise to chemical bonding of O calcium oxide to oxygen. So, the surface atoms can form bond between gel layers because that is the explanation that 7 MP a should cannot be just the only thing because it is stable in water which means that there is something more than simply 7 MP a and one of the idea suggested is that the between surface you know calcium oxygen to calcium to oxygen bonding might be there between gel to gel sheets right gel to gel sheets this bonding may also be present because of the surface atoms which right or hydrogen bonding or by condensation of silicon hydroxyl tetra you know for OH 4 groups leading to S I S I link edges. So, other kind of chemical bonding is also thought to be responsible for bond between gel to gel in addition to the vendor was bond because it is stable in water. So, gel to gel bond is vendor was kind or some sort of chemical bonding also may be present and that is what results in strength of gel well if the tension is applied this forces will oppose the tensile force. So, separation will be opposed by this forces which are bonding the gels compression on the other hand compression on the other hand is restricted by covalent bond within CHS. So, you try to push them now you are pushing the sheet against one sheet against another if you are trying to push them you are pushing one sheet against another if you are trying to push the sheets CHS under compression you are actually pushing one sheet against another which means that you are trying to compress the CHS gel itself CHS bond itself which is not possible. So, that is why they are strong in compression because you cannot compress CSH bond so easily. But if you pull you it would be you know you can separate out the sheets or CHS from one to another only the forces responsible for their bonding that is of the intermolecular forces you know they will hold them together. So, their weak intention because it is intermolecular forces opposes the tensile force whereas covalent bond in CHS opposes the compressive forces right. So, they are much stronger and they are 100 times stronger than this compressive forces are 100 times you know compress compressive the bond under compression the bond that has to be that has to be you know the bond the force restricting the compression or is 100 times more than when there was bond that is why they are so strong in compression. Well bond with aggregate is essentially mechanical interlocks. So, we will come to that sometime later on bond with aggregate is mechanical interlocks let us see. So, first of all when there were forces opposes the forces under tension or intermolecular forces of all kind compression is restricted by covalent bond within CHS and that is 100 times more than when there was bond. So, therefore, they are strong in compression not so strong in tension and of course, when it is comes to aggregate. So, it is gel to gel gel to aggregate is of course, mechanical interlocks right gel to gel is mechanical interlocks right. So, that was the bonding action why cement can bond itself cement paste you know you cannot separate out cement paste itself that is the reason, but they are bonding with the aggregates of course, is mechanical interlocks will look into it sometime later on when you look into the concrete strength. Next we look into heat of hydration with time let us see heat of because we have seen the contribution of each compound of cement to heat of hydration, with time how the heat of hydration is evolved let us look at it this side is time in hours let us say and that side is rate of heat evolution rate of heat evolution. Well initial phase is of course, in minutes then in hours then in days now if you look at it this is how the heat of hydration would look like you have a peak right in the beginning quick initial dissolution period followed by rate gets reduced down then rate picks up again and then the small hump here and that it in it follows that way. So, the stages I can say first stage stage 0 followed by stage 1 stage 2 3 and 4 and 5 first 0 stages initial dissolution so at that stage as square bit of heat evolution rate of heat evolution is high then in the stage 1 you know dormant it will relate to dormant period C 3 as hydration occurs here when rate of heat evolution of heat is very high and C 3 hydration occurs net stage. So, in this stage stage is 1 we will see that it is a transient formation 2 C H S growth 3 and 4 is also C H S growth and 5 is further C H S growth. So, this stage initial C H S growth occurs this is initial dissolution period 1 stage 1 is a transient formation stage 1 is a transient formation stage 2 is some C H S growth 3 and 4 C H S growth and 5 is again C H S growth C 3 S hydration occurs at the peak when the heat of hydration is peak C 3 S hydration occurs and next level of C 3 hydration that occurs later on that gives another small hump. So, that is heat of hydration rate of heat evolution you can see rate of heat evolution that is heat evolution per unit time that is what we are looking at joules per gram per hour if you look at it. Now, total heat of evolution total heat evolution if you look at it that would again with the same time. So, majority of the heat evolution really takes place in the initial this 20 hours or so and the order is of the total order would be 320 joules per gram etcetera after a after complete you know 24 hours or so. So, peak heat of rate of heat evolution will be 4 to 6 hours as we have seen in the last summer here about 7 8 hours 10 hours at that time and after that it becomes stabilizes out. So, initial there is a peak but that is not small period. So, if you sum it up it is not very large but then therefore, there will be rate of heat evolution in increase and a tens of peaks somewhere there at this stage and after that rate of heat evolution reduces. So, total heat evolution also reduces total heat of course, you can find out from Q 1 that is the heat of hydration of C 3 S multiplied by the amount of C 3 S. Q 2 is heat of hydration of C 2 S multiplied by the quantity of C 2 S per unit mass, Q 3 C 3 A heat of evolution of C 3 A and the amount of C 3 A per unit mass in the cement Q 4 is a heat of hydration of C 4 A F and this is a quantity. So, you can sum this up to find the total heat evolution at any stage or even in totality complete heat of hydration. This you know this quantity you know and this I have given you all here sometime the quantity of heat that is liberated per unit mass from the C 3 S and similarly from C 2 S C 3 A and C 4 A F. The another important aspect is strength contribution so we have seen that actually C 3 S hydration takes place in the beginning when we looked at the when we earlier looked into the you know various phases that is formed various product that is formed with time and we have seen that it is first that range at reaction followed by formation of CHS after about 6 hours or so and then calcium hydroxide also comes in this case actually C 3 S reacts earlier C 2 S reacts late. So, therefore, strength development if we see C 3 S is responsible for already strength development C 2 S initially it does not rate of strength development is not much right it follows like this and C 3 A contribution to strength is less and C 4 A F contribution to strength is even less. So initial strength normally comes out within 7 days because we are talking of days would be from C 3 S 28 days C 2 S contributes but it do contribute significantly to long term strength. But you see if you see C 3 S after about 28 days hardly any strength rate of strength strength gain has reduced significantly for C 3 S. On the other hand C 2 S picks up here the rate is increasing and you know so long term strength comes from C 2 S long term long term R D strength this has got less strength contribution. So, the strength contribution wise it is C 3 S which gives R D strength C 2 S gives later strength and we have seen that because the C H S that would come initially in the beginning would come from C 3 S and later on only C 2 S reaction takes place. We define the term degree of vibration, degree of hydration is the fraction of mass hydrated at any time. We in our case we are denoting it by H. So, degree of hydration H is the fraction of mass hydrated at any time that means, well just for our understanding if C dash is the mass of cement hydrated C is the original mass. So, H is given by this. So, mass hydrated quantity of cement hydrated by original. So, therefore H is the fraction it is the fraction. So, H is expressed degree of hydration is expressed as a fraction it is the fraction of mass hydrated at any time and this is this is a function of time this is a function of time and as you can see with age degree of hydration increases and then tends to become steady as we have seen you know because cement consists of four major compounds C 2 S C 3 S etcetera. So, they will a portion of it will hydrate up to certain period of time and later on the hydration rate is strength development is slow. So, naturally hydration is also slow. So, it picks up so it is typically of this kind of curve, but recently this few more measurements you know that experiments many recent experiments have demonstrated that this degree of hydration is a function of water cement ratio as well even for water cement ratio high water cement ratio like 0.5 for 0.5 0.6 etcetera. It is a function of water cement ratio itself. So, it is the one can measure this from non evaporable water content. So, you take the cement paste at any age under control condition you have prepared the paste continuous hydration and then block the hydration by some treatment actually isopropyl alcohol if you put it on that will absorb all water and stop the hydration. So, at any age you can stop the hydration then you can heat it up to find out the non evaporable water content. Evaporable water content will go away at 110 degree centigrade, but after that if you heat up you can find out the non evaporable water content and from that non evaporable water content measurement one can find out what is the you know degree of hydration and one can possibly relate this to the water cement ratio that age in this manner. So, it is a function of log of age also function of log of water cement ratio and this coefficients are of the order of around k 1 is 0.2 of the order k 2 is 0.06 k 3 is around 0.6 or so I think this you know. So, this one can one can obtain this constants from actual measurements. So, some values are available in literature and one can find these values. So, that is degree of hydration. Now, let us look at structure of CHS, CHS structure. Now, several models have been proposed this one is proposed by SI. These are sheets. So, you have got sheet one sheet another sheet and the other sheets. So, this sheet like structures having thickness of order around 30 Armstrong this is 400 to 600 Armstrong sheet clean and the space in between is 20 to 40 micron interlayer interlayer this space interlayer space. So, and the water is there. Now, you know in porous material water can be held in porous material you can hold the water first is chemically bound water that we have seen chemically bound water and chemically bound water are the CSH. So, this is chemically bound that we have seen. Then besides that since the surfaces have surfaces can have intermolecular forces there may be polarities. So, water being H 2 O being a polar liquid it has got a dipole. So, center of positive charge and negative charge they may not be at the same point they may not be coinciding. So, therefore, it is polar. So, it can get adsorbed at the surface. So, you have got adsorbed water adsorbed water at the surface adsorbed water right adsorbed water. Now, between two layers he actually called it inter crystal water between two layers. So, other than chemically combined water of course, you can have adsorbed layer adsorbed water and besides that course you can have capillary water which is taken up by suction capillary suction right. If you have larger size pores or relatively you know some mass of pores not very small pores fine pores fine particles they of course, adsorbed layer would be there. But, slightly larger size pores water can penetrate by capillary suction. So, the third type of water held is capillary water capillary water and in some cases there can be water held simply by mechanical action. For example, if I have a pore like this here water comes in here water comes in and is water comes in and it is just stuck here. So, this is mechanically held water. Now, in concrete or cement paste you will have chemically bound water adsorbed water and capillary water can also be there if it is saturated all right. Now, in his model in this model in the model he is talking of this sheets adsorbed water adsorbed water are the form layer of water at the surface are the form layer of water at the surface and the density is not one density of this water is not one right. It has got a different density. So, the adsorbed layer will be somewhere there at the boundaries at the surface then this water he is calling inter crystal water which is between which is between the layers layers of CHS and then still there will be some water between the space between the sheets it is being called as gel water it is being called as gel water. So, this was the model proposed one model proposed there is another model after spreader and here you can see is adsorbed water again at the surface and these are the sheets. So, CHS sheets are here the adsorbed water at the surface inter particle bond is between this particle another sheet adsorbed water these are the sheets. So, they are not in exact layers parallel layers, but they are in different orientation this x cross are inter layer hydrate water. So, you know inter layer hydrate water is in the shown as cross. So, these are all inter layer water adsorbed water is here this is the layers and within the layer there is inter layer water right. So, inter particle bond is here adsorbed water CHS sheet A is this inter layer water and you know these are the CHS sheet B is inter layer hydrate water. So, this is another model. So, this is the model proposed by power in this model these are the CHS these are the CHS sheets you can see and capillary pores there are large space which he calls as capillary pores as I was telling you where relatively larger pores this once water can enter by capillary suction. So, because of the surface tension forces because of the surface tension forces as you know at the inter phase there will be surface tension forces like you deep capillary if you deep Capillary into if you deep capillary into water. There is capillary rise as you know capillary rise and this is because of surface tension forces. So, water can come here here because of surface tension forces and this pore sizes are large and these are called capillary pores and gel pores are smaller ones between the gels, so these are the CHS sheets and this between the CHS sheets the space which is there where there will be gel pores, you know this is called as gel pores which is inherent of the gel system. Now larger pores are capillary pores. So, this is how the power model looks like we have capillary pores and layers of CHS, layers of CHS and within the layers of CHS the smaller pores are being called as gel pores. So, these are the models which represent the hardened paste structures. So, having done that now we can think of pores in the paste. Gel is a as we have explained earlier gel is colloid sized particles having 28 percent characteristics porosity involving pores of average with as 15 Armstrong and these are gel pores. So, they are gel pores are gel pores are micro pores or you can say when nanopores 0.5 nanometer to 100 nanometer size. These are generally considered to be responsible for shrinkage and creep. Capillary pores they are slightly larger size called mesopores and size would be 5 nanometer to 5000 nanometer. They are responsible for mechanical strength that means low you know load carrying capacity and durability property of the cement paste and then concrete. Then there could be pores coming because of pore compaction. So, these are micro pores or because of air entrainment. Air entrainment is deliberate air entrainment is used in some cases in order to provide better freeze-thou resistance. We will look into that sometime later on and pore compaction can also results in large sized pores. So, therefore, what we see is the cement paste has got a structure it is porous inherently porous hydraulic cement paste has got a hardened paste has got a structure which is inherently porous and it is got two types of pores that has been recognized one is gel pores. It has got a gelatinous structures H s that is the major compound which is formed after hydration it has got a sheet like structures and it is inherently porous with 28 percent characteristic porosity. The 28 percent characteristic porosity has been determined from indirect experimental evidences. Similar the size of the gel pores has been also determined from experimental evidences nitrogen adsorption technique etcetera etcetera. Then the other type of pores which can be there is the capillary pores which are large size pores and if you recall the hydration process that we looked into we said that there are inner product of hydration which is within the original gain boundary we have outer product because hydration product occupies more volume than the original cement. Therefore, some of those water field space will be filled in by hydration product and those we call as outer product calcium hydroxide also stays outside the original gain boundary and originally water field space which remain vacant vacant after hydration forms capillary pores. So, if you can recall that you know we can see that those pores are of the larger size and they are responsible for durability and mechanical properties namely strength etcetera and larger size pores could be there if we have deliver it air entertainment why you do it will come to that sometime later on and if you have a pore compaction then also you can have large size pores. Let us see how much is the chemically combined water right now to do that people have done tests experiments on individual compounds right. So, if we want to find out the chemically combined water all right we must know how much is a amount of water C 3 S will C 3 S will require for full hydration how much the quantity of water C 2 S require for full hydration you know. So, this is the quantity of water required by 1 gram of C 2 S for its full hydration a 3 is the quantity of water required by 1 gram of C 3 A for full hydration and a for similarly a 4 is the quantity of water required for by 1 gram of C 4 A for full hydration. So, then this is the chemically combined water so chemically combined water per unit mass is W N is the amount of water that will combine with C cement C is the quantity of cement. So, quantity of water that will combine with per unit mass is W N by C and if I know the quantity of C 3 S proportion of C 3 S proportion of C 3 S proportion of C 2 S proportion of proportion of C 3 A and proportion of C 4 A F then I can find out chemically combined water for C quantity of cement. The compound quantities proportion would be C 3 S C 2 S etcetera. Now, people have actually done experiments for very long term very long term experiments have been done by people to find out the amount of water bound to each compound and this results are actually given in this table. If you look at it these are A I's this A 1 A 2 A 3 A 4 and this is A 1 A 2 A 3 A 4 and with a water cement ratio water to cement ratio and H. So, water cement ratio of 0.4 in one year it was observed that 1 gram of C 3 S consumes around 0.2 to 8 grams of water. For 0.4 water cement ratio 6 and half years this becomes 0.234 and in 13 years this became 0.230. So, complete hydration nearly one can assume 13 years is a very long time and the test have been performed on individual compound in this manner. A 2 is that was for C 2 S and in one year 0.168 grams of water reacted with 1 gram of C 2 S in 0.4 years I mean in 6 and half years 0.178 and in 13 years 0.196 all this with 0.4 water cement ratio. Similarly, A 3 you know you can see that in 13 years 0.5 to 2 grams of water reacted with 1 gram of C 3 A and A 4 that is 1 gram of C 4 A F reacted with 0.132 grams of water in one year in 6 and half year 0.158 and 38 year it was something like this. But if the water cement ratio changed to 0.6 and 0.8 in 6 and half years the variation was something like this. I think there may be some mistake in this figure whatever it is what we see is that different quantities of water are required by different compounds of cement for their complete hydration because 13 years one can assume it to be a full hydration. Now supposing I assume 48% C 3 S 25% C 2 S and 11% C 3 A and 9% C 4 A F chemically combined water at complete hydration is given by this formula 0.23 into 0.48 because 23 into 0.48 because 48% is C 3 S 0.25 into 0.196 0.11% C 3 A. So, it is like this and approximately this value comes out to be 0.23. So, with 48% C 3 S 25% C 2 S 11% C 3 A and 9% C 4 A F 100 grams or 1 gram of cement containing this quantity because 1 gram of cement will have then 0.48 grams of C 3 S 0.25 grams of C 2 S etcetera etcetera. So, 1 gram of cement will react approximately with 0.23 grams of water. If this proportion changes slightly this might change a little bit because that is why I have written approximately. So, generally supposing you consider this as 55 this as 22 and this is maybe some less etcetera etcetera. This value will change but round out 0.23 only but round about 0.23 only. So, round about 0.23 only. So, values would change approximately therefore, 1 gram of cement reacts with 0.23 grams of water in for complete hydration. 13 years is a very long time after that there was practically no hydration. So, stoichiometrically we can say that 1 gram of water 1 gram of cement requires 0.23 grams of water for complete reaction. So, this is one information other information that was that became available from early experiments in 1950s is that density of hydration product solid product of hydration varies from 2.43 to 2.59 2.43 to 2.59 and if you look at the average it will be 2.51 grams per CC. So, 100 grams of cement therefore, chemically reacts with 23 grams of water 1 gram with 0.23. So, 100 gram with 0.23 you know 23 gram of water and do it produce 1.23 gram of hydration product which can occupy 1.23 divided by 2.51.4 9 CC because this is grams per CC this is the grams. So, 0.49 CC. So, the hydration solid product of hydration will occupy 0.49 CC. Now, if you look at cement is specific gravity is generally taken to be 3.15 on an average. So, 1 gram of cement will occupy 1 by 3.15 that is 0.32 this will come out as 0.32. So, 0.32 plus 0.323 and water occupies the same volume some sub 2.55 and thus 0.55 and the product solid product of hydration occupies 0.49. Therefore, this occupies less than the original volume of water right original material this is assumed to be some empty space. So, the difference is assumed to be some empty space you see this difference is assumed to be. So, 0.32 plus 0.23 makes it 0.55 this is what it is minus 0.49 gives you 0.06 CC and therefore, this is assumed to be this is assumed to be some empty space. But this 0.49 actually has got internal pores internal pores and this is typically 28 percent. So, it has got internal pores 28 percent 0.06 CC of water remains aside, but this 0.49 actually will occupy much higher than 0.49 because 28 percent characteristic porosity is there 28 percent characteristics porosity is there and therefore, 0.49 divided by 0.72 which will give you roughly about 0.68 you know and therefore, this difference gives you 0.19 CC. So, the gel porosity is 0.19 0.19 CC gel porosity is 0.19 or I mean gel pores is 0.19 CC. So, if I take 1 gram of cement if I take 1 gram of cement and allow it to hydrate fully then it will occupy actually 0.49 CC the solid product of hydration will occupy 0.19 CC will be occupied by the gel pores within you know and close within this product of hydration plus you may have a capillary pore space of 0.06 CC empty capillary sized pores. So, this is what comes from the previous models and if I consider C gram of cement mixed with W gram of water the volume would be C 3 C divided by 3.15 plus W. So, 0.332 C plus W 0.32 C plus W 0.32 C plus W. So, this is the amount right because specific gravity or density of cement is taken to be 3.15 grams per CC. After a period of hydration say degree of hydration being H C H gram of cement would react because H is defined as a fraction with 0.23 C H gram of water to produce 1.23 C H gram of hydration product. The volume occupied by the solid product of hydration therefore, is 0.49 CH C C. So, this is C C basically 0.49 CH C C same calculation follows because 1.23 grams occupied 0.49 CH is the amount of cement that is reacted. So, therefore, 0.49 CH gel porosity is 28 percent thus volume of gel pores would be 0.19 CH same thing same calculation is being repeated only now I add CH with it. So, earlier everything was 1 gram I was taking if I take C grams of cement and H is the degree of hydration then C H grams of cement will react and everything has to be multiplied by CH and that is how I get it. So, I get 0.49 CH as the solid volume of solid product of hydration 0.49 CH C C 0.19 CH C C is a gel pores volume right. So, that is how I can just calculate out the volume of pores gel pores the mass of dehydrated cement of course, will be C into 1 minus H mass of because CH has hydrated originally C C minus CH is nothing, but C minus 1 minus H. So, that is what it is mass of hydrated cement will be only this much and corresponding volume because density of cement is 3.15. So, will be 0.32 CH this should be bracket C H 0.32 CH into 1 minus H into this should be bracket 1 minus H 0.30 CH is 0.30 CH into 3.32 CH 1 minus H that would be the mass of volume of dehydrated cement volume of dehydrated cement and volume of empty capillaries will be same 0.06 CH like earlier we have done it will be 0.06 CH. Now, reaction takes place you know it takes time it doesn't to occur instantaneously it is not instantaneous, but the framework of the solid is formed quite quickly. So, within half an hour time you know initial set. So, framework forms pretty quickly you cannot disturb it any further. So, solid skeleton is formed within a short time you know initial set. So, framework forms pretty quickly you cannot disturb it any further. So, solid skeleton is formed within a short time since solid skeleton is formed within a short time the rest of the hydration product occupies only the space available within that solid skeleton. So, additional hydration product occupies original water filled space within the skeleton the structure is formed very quickly this is the structure form, but some space are blank. So, those blank spaces are filled in by additional hydration product because solid is formed, but a porous solid structure is formed once it solidifies and those porous remember we had blue colored water which outer product filled in leaving some water filled space those space are the space available for hydration product those are generated in the later stages of hydration because solid skeleton is formed within a short period of time. And the force the force of hydration volume expansion force of hydration is not so high as to cause disruption of the structure therefore, they only fill in the original space there will be no change in the total volume. So, this if we look it into look into this we look into it will look like this like this is chematically cement sea grams water W gram time let us say hydration has occurred degree of hydration let us say is H. Now, unhydrated cement remaining is C into 1 minus H gram and its volume is well this is 3 point 3 2 I will say 3 2 C 1 minus H C C approximately and you know this is the unhydrated volume this is the solid hydration product which is 0.49 CH C C that is what we have seen this will be the gel force corresponding gel force which is 0.19 CH C C C. So, this is the gel force and some space of water still not filled by the material remain as capillary is we can call it as capillary water we can call it as capillary water and empty capillaries will be like this. So, this is the empty capillaries and this sums up whatever we have now original volume is this much how much 0.3 2 C plus W C C and this volume is conserved this volume is conserved. So, this volume must be same as this volume this volume is conserved. So, therefore, this volume must be same as this volume therefore, using these concepts I can calculate out the porosity. So, porosity of paste I can calculate out the volume is conserved the volume of capillary water will be total initial volume minus volume one hydrated cement and empty capillaries I can I can just find out the capillary water volume by finding initial total volume is known and other component volumes are known I subtract them will look into this in the next class in the beginning the equations etcetera. And we will find out that the volume of capillary volume of capillary empty capillaries would work out to be W minus 0.36 H. Therefore, porosity I can calculate out get an expression for the porosity based on this will repeat this in the next class and gel porosity I can find out I can find out total porosity. So, this will look in the next class so, summarizing today we have looked into bonding action heat of hydration degree of hydration structure of hydrated paste and we try to find out the porosity which you shall be looking into in the next class. So, that is what so, next class we will look into the total porosity and followed by properties you know tests and various kind of properties of cement paste cement paste. Thank you very much. Thank you. === Lecture 4 Transcript === Welcome to module 1. lecture 4 of concrete technology. We shall be discussing today cement properties and tests, but before that we shall be actually starting from where we have finished in the last class. So, we will talk of porosity of paste, then we will look into properties of properties and test on cement, setting, fineness, soundness, strength and lastly we will look into types of cement. We will just start this types of cement. So, let us start from where we have stopped in the last class. We are trying to estimate the porosity in you know of cement paste. In our earlier lecture we recognized two types of inherent pores in the cement paste. One we called it as gel pores, which is a part of the structure of the product of hydration and second one is a capillary pores and also we stated since the reaction takes relatively long time and is not instantaneous, but the structure solid structure forms quickly. Therefore, as the hydration progresses, hydration product occupies the space that was originally filled by water and that is how capillary porosity reduces, because capillary porosity are those pores which are left blank, which are actually originally water filled space and are left blank because hydration product could not fill those originally water filled space. So, let us start from this figure porosity of cement. If you recall the last class, we said let us say C gram of cement, we had W gram of water to it and with time hydration progresses, let us say our degree of hydration is H, then unhydrous cement will be C into 1 minus H, because H is the fraction of cement hydrated, the fraction remain unhydrated will be C minus C into 1 minus H by mass and corresponding volume is given by this one you know specific gravity of cement being known, it is 0.32 C we can say 0.32217 C into 1 minus H. This is the unhydrated cement, C H is a mass of the cement that is reacted, because H is the degree of hydration means fraction of cement that is reacted and the volume of hydration product we know it is C H grams 4.49 C H C C, 0.49 C H C C, so volume of product hydration product C H gram is 0.49 C H C C and then corresponding gel force is 0.19 C H C C, so we have derived all this in the last class. This is a space remain unoccupied and will be capillary, remain will remain as capillary water and this portion is empty capillary and we have also calculated this as 0.06 C H C C. Now, total initial volume of cement plus water is 0.317 C plus W C C or 0.32 C approximately this can be written as 0.32 C plus W C C, so this is the total volume and this volume is conserved because this will as it hydrates, this will solidify quickly and the skeleton structure will comprise of this total volume. So, hydration product must occupy this volume including the void spaces, complete hydration product including void spaces must occupy this volume. So, these two volumes are conserved and on this basis it shall be able to calculate out the volume of capillaries. So, volume of capillaries we calculate out as because the total volume is conserved, the volume of capillary water is calculated as total initial volume, total initial volume, total initial volume minus volume of unhydrated cement, solid product of hydration minus gel pores and empty capillaries. So, what we are doing we are actually subtracting from this total volume, from this total volume we are subtracting this, this, this and this. So, we will get this volume. So, from this total volume we are doing this and that is how we can get the volume of empty capillary or capillary water, volume of capillary water, we can find out total initial volume minus volume of unhydrated cement, solid minus solid product of hydration minus volume of gel pores and empty capillaries. So, if we do that this was to known to us was a total initial volume was 0.3 to C plus W, volume of unhydrated cement is 0.3 to C into 1 minus H from the previous diagram, then volume of this is the volume of hydration product 0.49 CH solid product of hydration, gel pore is 0.19 CH and this is empty capillaries and in this one you can see that 0.3 to C and 0.3 to C into 1 this will cancel out because there is a minus sign. So, it will be left with the rest of the things. So, this W will come here right 0.32 CH plus this will be there because there is a minus sign here, there is a minus sign here. So, this is remaining here as 0.32 you know grounded off to 0.32 and 0.49 and 0.19 some up gives us 0.74 CH right 6 H 6 H 6 H plus 0.06 CH all this sums up as 0.74 CH because 0.49 is 0.75 CH plus 0.19 plus 0.06 will give me 0.74. So, this is 0.74 CH and 7 4 minus 0.32 7 4 minus 0.32 is simply 2 0.42. So, I get volume of empty volume of empty capillaries as W minus 0.42 CH because this will cancel out together with this. So, left is W and minus this minus and this minus makes it this and rest of the time if I sum up I get 0.74. So, total I will get something like W minus 0.42 CH. Thus the volume of empty capillaries volume of total volume of capillaries will be volume of empty capillaries plus volume of capillary water and this if I sum up W minus 0.42 CH plus 0.06 CH I guess I get W minus 0.36 CH. So, volume total volume of capillaries in the system will be W minus 0.36 CH. Thus I can get an expression for capillary porosity. I can get an expression for capillary porosity. Capillary porosity will be volume of capillary pores divided by total volume. Now, what is the total volume? It is the sum of originally added cement volume plus water. Let us see. So, porosity is volume of pores divided by total volume. Volum of pores divided by total volume. Capillary porosity is the volume of capillary pores divided by total volume and the final volume is same as the total initial volume. Therefore, this is nothing but 0.3 2 C plus W. That is what we have seen and therefore, capillary porosity will be W minus 0.36 CH. So, this is the 1.36 CH divided by W plus 0.32 C and if I divide both side by C. So, this will cancel out I will have W by C, W by C 0.32. So, you can see that capillary porosity is given by this formula. Capillary porosity is given by this formula. Similarly, I can find out the gel porosity. Similarly, I can find out the gel porosity. So, gel porosity will be what? Gel porosity will be volume of gel pores divided by total volume. Volume of gel pores divided by total volume and recall volume of gel pores were 0.19 H into C and this was W plus this C. So, C if I divide both side by C, I get 0.19 H 0.19 H divided by 0.317 or 0.32 plus W by C. So, this is the gel porosity. So, if I sum this up total now, I will get the total porosity. So, total porosity is volume of gel pores. You know total porosity volume of gel pores plus capillary pores. Gel pores volume of pores total porosity I divide that volume of pores divided by total volume. Total volume of pores divided by total volume and this is nothing but sum of gel porosity plus capillary porosity. Sum of gel porosity plus capillary porosity and which will be you know which will be if I sum it up. So, what do I get? Just let me do the summing. Let me do the summing 1 W by C plus you know let me just do it like this. Let me do it here. W by C minus 0.36 H plus 0.19 H plus 0.17 H is equals to W by C minus 0.36 divided by 0.19 H is 0.17. So, if I sum up volume of you know capillary pores plus volume of gel pores divided by C of course, then just let me do it again. Let me do it again. See the capillary volume of capillary pore porosity was 0.36 H divided by C of course, then just let me do it again. Let me do it again. See the capillary volume of capillary pore porosity was 0.36 H divided by W by C plus 0.32 C plus 0.19 H divided by W by C plus 0.32 C you know 3.317 is approximate to equal to 0.32 that is what I am using. So, if you sum this up you will get W minus 0.17 H divided by W by C W by C plus 0.32. So, this is what you will get because minus 0.36 plus 0.19 is equals to minus 0.17. So, this follows therefore, summing up this 2 will give me total porosity as W by C minus 0.17 H divided by this. So, this is how I can determine the total porosity of 7 paste. Now, you see the total porosity of 7 paste is the imposterous. So, this is the imposterous. So, this is the imposterous minus 0.17 H divided by this. So, this is how I can determine the total porosity of 7 paste. Now, you see the total porosity of 7 paste is important, but one interesting thing is that you you know for complete hydration for complete hydration the water measurement ratio minimum water measurement ratio required for complete hydration I can derive from this concept. Now, if I have less water then the originally water field space will be small you know and if it is small the hydration product would not be able to occupy this space because the space is not available because if the original water field space is small or proportion of water or water cement ratio is small volume occupied by water would be small and thus hydration product will not have sufficient space to fill in. You know sufficient space for itself to occupy. Now, it does not have very the it it doesn't you know the product this product do not create any pressure although cement with water after reaction expands, but you know it is not. It doesn't create pressure of this volume expansion due to hydration is not so high as to either disrupt the solid structure of the cement paste or create new space. So, hydration maximum degree of hydration is limited by the originally originally you know quantity of originally added water or in other words by water cement ratio let us see this. So, with progress of hydration capillary porosity reduces and maximum degree of hydration will become 0 if I don't have sufficient space. So, therefore, you can see that capillary porosity is this and for this to be 0 maximum degree of hydration is W by C by 0.36. In other words if I have a water cement ratio less than 0.36 I will never had complete hydration. In other words if I have water cement ratio less than 0.36 this time will be negative you can't have negative. Capillary porosity that means you need more space than that is available. Therefore, water cement ratio for water cement ratio less than 0.36 complete hydration is not possible due to leak lack of available space to be filled by product of hydration. This is because hydration is not instantaneous reaction this reaction takes some time solid skeleton is formed within a short period of time. The solid skeleton will have capillary space within it occupied by capillary water as the hydration progresses which progresses over a very long period of time compared to the initial setting time let us say or solid skeleton. This product of hydration would occupy the origin of water field space. Now, if you have less water in the beginning you will have less space. So, product of hydration where it will go it does not have space. So, simply it will not be produced that is how maximum hydration possible is limited for low water cement ratio. So, if the water cement ratio is less than 0.36 complete hydration is not possible. At 0.36 degree of hydration maximum possible degree of hydration come. But more than that there are some other factors which we have seen in the last class that water cement ratio with water cement ratio is also a function of water cement ratio. And therefore, degree of hydration is a function of water cement ratio and therefore, question of 100 percent hydration with ages just it is not there it is simply it will not be there because the degree of hydration is asymptotic to some value of function of water cement ratio. So, in any case below 0.36 it can never fully hydrate right. Now, we can look into consistency of paste. So, so far we looked into the porosity which we actually continued from the previous class. Now, we can look into the consistency of paste some properties. So, it is one important properties consistency of paste related to amount of water that is required to be added. To make it uniform paste you know because when you add water when water water is added water makes the cement paste plastic you add a little bit of water it makes it plastic. And by progressive addition of water air field boards are occupied by water. So, in the original system cement particles will have air field space in between them. This is particulate system they will have a given kind of packing but within the grains or within the particles of cement the void space will be filled by air. As we as I add water this water field space will be filled by air field space will be occupied by water. Now, basic water content is achieved. So, you go on adding the water a water content we call it basic water content it is achieved when all open air boards are isolated by water to air bubbles. So, what happens we will just see by diagram that as you go on adding water air paths where all interconnected. The interstitial space between the particles were all connected by air. Now, you add water this space will be filled in by water. Now, when as you know as then a situation will arise at certain point of time as you go on adding water a situation will arise at certain point of time when air field spaces will become disconnected. Earlier they were all connected but they will become isolated that condition the amount of water that is required to arrive at that condition we call it as basic water content. We call it as basic water content and it is achieved when all open air boards are isolated by water to air bubbles and the corresponding consistency actually is normal consistency. So, corresponding consistency is normal consistency if you add more water it makes the paste softer and greater dispersion of cement particle may occur. So, cement particle can also get separated if you of course use a dispersing agent otherwise you know the possibility of getting separated exist they might be clogged but each clogged system will be separated out by water. So, if you add more water paste and mix it properly the cement particles may be separated by water from each other. Let us see diagrammatically what it is right. So, setting test setting of course you know say important issue is setting test of cement is done at constant consistency. So, this is important and initial water is non lubricating at basic consistency air bubbles are isolated this is what we are looking at. So, that is what we are saying consistency is important consistency per say may not be as important but then we do setting test at a constant consistency. Now, how can you define a constant consistency of course it was done initially empirically through a particular test which we will talk about. But then this you know this water content corresponding to the standard consistency will not you know we can be defined really and therefore that is at that consistency we do the test. Now, that consistency correspond to basic water content as I mentioned and consider this is a cement particle another cement particle another one and another one they have a simple cubic packing. I am just for simplicity I am assuming they have simple cubic packing this has got simple cubic packing right for simplicity we assume that this has got simple cubic packing. And the space here is air void space here is air void. So, as I add water some of this void space are filled by water a pendular state nearly pendular state not really pendular state. So, you have water filled here and air void inside right and air is still still touching to the cement system air is still touching to the cement system and air voids may still remain interconnected. But if you add more water let us say you add more water a time will come when the air bubble will get isolated. So, this is my air bubble this is the air bubble and as it get isolated this corresponds to basic consistency. So, when just they are isolated that means just when the pendular state it is reached that is what corresponds to basic consistency. And if you add more water rapidly it will become it will become the paste will become you know more plastic. Now, this standard consistency is you know this is this corresponds to about 26 to 33 percent by mass of dry cement this corresponds to about 26 to 33 percent by mass of dry cement. How do we measure this we measure this by an apparatus called beacons apparatus. In fact, this instrument came first the concepts of the basic consistency came much later. That was given by power in fact in 1950s this was in a in 19th century. So, this test this is an empirical test an empirical device developed in order to arrive at setting time consistency etcetera of cement. Now, this apparatus has got you know this is your cement in a mold paste in a mold the mold will dimensions are given not very important for our class to look into the dimensions. So, dimensions are given and you have got a needle which are called beacons needle I mean more than one needle you have been fact you have got first one millimeter square needle. And then this is a needle plus a small plunger the small needle one millimeter square then a plunger which larger diameter and with a small gap between the tip of the needle and the plunger bottom right the dimensions are given. So, it can make an impression on to the paste like this the center point the needle will make an impression like this and outside the plunger boundary will make an impression like this. And this is one meter square needle this is a needle 10 mm square. So, these three needles are used to determine standard consistency initial setting time and final setting time. So, let us see what standard how standard consistency is determined this needle one can lift it up and place it just on top of the cement here cement paste here and allow it to drop on its own. So, standard consistency is determined by this plunger 10 mm plunger that is this one and its penetration should be when the penetration reaches 5 to 7 millimeter from bottom. So, find out the time time at which penetration so consistency you know the time at which 5 to 7 millimeter from the bottom is is reached. Now, that time you know first you go on adding water so increase the water increase the water start with the water maybe 25 percent gone increasing 26 percent 27 percent etcetera etcetera and find out the penetration. When the penetration can be let us say total penetration can be 40 millimeter now you measure the penetration from the top because there is a needle has got you know you can measure the needle the graduation. And if you measure from the needle how much it has penetrated so how much it is from the bottom that you can find out the water content or most you know W by C express as percentage when at which the needle penetration between between between 5 to 7 that corresponds to standard consistency. So, this is you can see that this is an empirical test purely an empirical test devised by Vicat in order to come to that standard consistency. In fact, the basic water content which I talked about this was postulated by TC power and their team in 1950s and it first that looked into this basic water content at which actually it becomes uniform consistent and after that rapidly it becomes plastic if you add any addition water. Now, they then they found that the water basic water content they actually the term you know the designated the water content which they designated as basic water content water content corresponding to basic consistency that is same as the standard consistency that you roughly same as the standard consistency that you obtain from Vicat stage. So, standard consistency is this now this test is of course, important from the point of view that we test setting time at this water content because you have to keep certain things constant you want to find out setting time. So, you have you consistency we keep constant because fineness the setting time may be dependent on fineness of the cement but at the same time the fineness will also go under consistency. So, you have paste the you know how much water you should be added we do not keep the amount of water constant rather we keep the consistency constant and the water required to attain standard consistency because some cases may be very dry. So, supposing the cement has got a very high standard consistency because lot of water in order to arrive at that basic water content in that case if you would have kept the water content same at a low water content low water content it would have been very very dry. So, the penetration of the needle wouldn't have been possible right not because not because of the cement characteristics but because of the consistency or plasticity of the paste itself. So, plasticity is maintained constant and then setting time is measured right and this plasticity is related to the standard consistency that is why we got to get standard consistency. Let us see what we understand by setting again we have discussed this a little bit earlier or few classes earlier that it is actually cement becomes solid with time as the hydration as the reaction progresses as the reaction progresses it becomes solid with time right. So, this solidification in a way is actually related to setting and hardening is gain of strength but strength gain do take place during solidification also because liquid if you apply force it simply deforms. So, it is in plastic state I mean liquid of course, is deforms just on its own without any load a plastic material is one where you put a constant load it will go on continuously deforming right liquid does not have a definite shape. So, it just deforms just deforms on its own weight or just deforms straight away put it in any part it will take shape of that form a vessel shape of the vessel but a plastic material you put any load it will simply deform all right. So, solid is one which has got a definite shape if you want to cause its deformation you have to apply load and that is its deformation is governed by Hooke's law. So, stress strain relationship as we understand so therefore, during solidification some strength gain do take place because after all from plastic to it is going to a solid state. So, let us see schematically we can represent initially it will be dormant period where there is no strength gain why x is a strength x x is a curing time let us say so no strength gain. Then there will be rapid strength gain right and this process is setting so it will solidify it has solidified actually quick strength gain is occurred but during the hardening process this is the process of hardening the strength gain will follow in this manner. So, this is what we understand hardening essentially is related to strength gain setting is related to solidification but do strength gain do occur during that period as well. Setting is measured again by this we can separate us but now you have a different needle you use this needle initial setting time is for with with 1 millimeter square needle and penetration up to 5 millimeter from bottom signifies initial setting time. So, the needle has changed standard consistency this needle initial setting time this needle and final setting time we use this where this needle 1 millimeter square needle this 1 millimeter square needle which is projection is used such that you know when only this needle makes this is projection there is a small point 3 millimeter projection. So, when this projection makes a mark on to the cement paste top but the this mark the outer outer periphery mark is not there only the needle makes an impression the other one does not make an impression that means penetration is very very small it is less than point equals to point 3 millimeter the other one is not penetrating this one is not penetrating this end is not penetrating this end is not penetrating right this end is not penetrating. That is that is called final setting time so when this this is penetrating this tip is penetrating this end does not leave any mark that we call as final setting time that we call as final setting time. So, this is how we measure the setting time and this is the concept of setting time of cement setting time of cement particle size distribution of cement is important. In other words, fineness of the cement is important. Finer the cement it will react fast but at the same time it will require more water for wetting or standard consistency. So, fineness is particle size distribution of cement is very very important. Finer cement can gain strength R D. Now, how do you measure particle size distribution of sizes particle size and its distribution of cement. There can be several techniques highly instrumental technique like this is time of transition method as it is called time of transition method that gives us particle size this is for let us estimate. So, varying from one micron to somewhere around 100 microns this is for some cement ordinary Portland cement and another material silica fume which we will discuss later shows particle size much smaller maximum is somewhere there. P could be somewhere there is one particle silica fume better one may have all particle somewhere there. You can see the cement particle size but it is may depend you know this particle size at its distribution that is what is the range of particle sizes mostly it is from about you know this is this should be about 5 micron. So, 5 micron to less than 100 micron is the size of this particular cement by this method but supposing you use another method called lesser diffraction you might get somewhat different. This is time of transition is also a laser phase method there are several advanced method to through which you can determine the particle size distribution of cement but there are simpler methods which are also used for example, we use specific surface concept of specific surface now specific surface is defined as the surface area. So, per unit mass or may be volume which will look later on so specific surface per unit mass or volume now in case of cement of course, use surface area per unit mass. Now, you can see this supposing I have got spherical particle for spherical particle surface area for a single particle is 4 pi r square volume is pi r cube 4 by 3 pi r cube into rho the density. So, specific surface will be equals to 4 pi r square divided by 4 by 3 pi r cube into rho will be equals to 3 by rho r. So, finer the particle more will be the specific surface finer the particle. So, let me just write this again simply specific surface is 3 by r rho. So, finer the particles higher is specific surface. So, for specific surface higher specific surface means finer particle higher specific surface means specific particle. So, we determine in case of cement we in case of cement surface area specific surface you see the cumulative percentage passing fraction this is a sieve size may be in microns this could be microns and this is specific surface by a particular method is called Wagner methods. So, if you look at the size distribution surface area has got a relationship with size distribution. If I can find out by particle size distribution specific surface or surface area I can find out you know correspondingly. So, higher the surface size distribution specific surfaces in this manner. So, it is related this Wagner method is based on stroke slow what is stroke slow I will not go into the equation. But, supposing I have got a target mixture I have got a target mixture I have got a target mixture I have got a target mixture right particles are there in this one. Finer particle larger particle comes here below larger ones first large particle larger then finer particle. So, you may you might have done in soil hydrometer analysis Wagner method is based on similar principle but you can view this through optical method. Number of particles at this depth number of particles at this depth and other depth etcetera etcetera and you can get the specific surface. You can also determine the size distribution and if you determine the size distribution that is how the relationship is right. Now, most popular of course is blaine surface area measurement you see there are other measurement called blaine surface area measurement. And most popular is blaine's method for measurement of surface area. So, let us see what is what does this gives. But, before that it is important to mention that no two methods provide same result and analysis is method dependent like time of transition as I said whatever particle size distribution it gives lesser diffraction do not give the same thing. Neither the you know but hydrometer analysis will give you the same thing if you do it through microscopy unknown give the same thing. So, there are problems every method has got the problem but they can be used for relative comparison. If you use same method two Siemens can be compared at which Siemens is finer than the other Siemens that you can say. So, blaine's method therefore is most commonly used because it is a very simple method and test can be done in any laboratory without much difficulty. So, let us see blaine's method. In blaine's method what you do is you have actually a perforated brass disk here a filter paper and here this bed of Siemens. So, this you know this one looks like this this bed of Siemens it is packed in a given manner with a plunger you know this in this one we put a plunger puts fixed quantity of Siemens put a plunger and this volume is fixed. So, it is approximately assume that it will have 50 percent porosity. So, Siemens particles are packed in a standard manner to have a particular amount of voids in them right porosity and then this is placed here. This place here it has got a perforated brass disk it is it is placed here there is a filter paper here. So, nothing will go out and they put the plunger from top no nothing will come out of the filter. So, put the plunger on top and fix this dimension 1.5 etcetera etcetera and then put it here it is fixed here. Now, you have got a manometer this is 1.5 centimeter thick bed with 0.5 porosity is prepared and fixed on top of a manometer with non-hygroscopic liquid to level 4 to this level to this level at this level at the non-hygroscopic liquid is filled. Now, usually it is kerosene. So, you fix it up at this level you know this is filled up to initially it is filled up there. This distance is marks are there 3, 2, 1 etcetera let us see. So, what you do is we can you know the distances are also available we know how much is ahead would be. So, what you do is after we place it here simple by simple section by simple hand manual section right. So, you can you can suck this air out of it such that this liquid moves up to 1 this is moves up to 1 you know air is evacuated up to liquid reaching 1. This is simply done manually by using a small pump you can say is you know like like the horn of a cycle mixture or something like that you just just or maybe suck it by mouth or something of that kind. So, simply this is evacuated so that this manometric liquid reaches 0.1 usually it is kerosene or something of that kind right. I mean non-hygroscopic liquid which is not absorbed water not kerosene. So, it fix not kerosene but some liquid which is non-hygroscopic and then it is put to 1 just suck up to 1. So, evocation evac back home is created then close this valve close this valve close this valve right. And note the time of fall of this liquid from note the time of fall of the liquid from note the time of fall of the liquid from 2 to 2 to 3. So, from here to here 2 to 3 so note the time the time required so what you call what you do you suck it up to this or evacuate it such that this liquid reaches here. Then it will start falling the moment it reaches here you put on your stopwatch and stop the stopwatch at this point the time is noted this time root over of this time is proportional to specific surface there are some formula empirical formula long if you know we need not look into that but this is proportional to k under root t. You can understand physically you know if you have larger surface area so while if it is larger surface area then friction offered to the flow of air from here to here you can actually pump the liquid up the liquid will fall because air will enter from the top air will enter from this air will enter through this. Now to enter through this the entrance of air the quantity of time required for air to cause drop of this manometric liquid from 2 to 3 0.2 to 3 or reduction of evacuation from 0.2 to 3 by 5.5 centimeter is actually this from 2 to 3 will depend upon permeability of the cement bed here permeability of cement bed here if it is more permeable if it is more permeable then if it is more permeable you know it will depend upon the surface area larger the surface area time required will be more if it is more permeable time required will be less if it is less permeable time required will be more. Now why when it will be less permeable when surface area it encounters is large when surface area it encounters is large. So surface area is proportional to under root t right larger the surface area of the cement here the air has to encounter while moving through this it will take longer time so surface area is proportional to under root t. So this is how we find out blind surface minimum specified for ordinary Portland cement is 2 to 5 0 centimeter square per gram 2 to centimeter square 2 to 5 centimeter square centimeter square per gram minimum or 225 meter square per kg right most of the cement will have something like close to you know 300 etcetera meter square per kg. So most of the cement will have this values will come a come to this sometime later on. Now let us see how do you determine free lime in cement free lime causes expansion and we have defined the lime saturation factors ratio of actual lime content to maximum lime content that can be allowed without producing free lime right. Remember that we discussed and this lime saturation factor also this equation we have discussed earlier in the context of cement production. So free lime in an important issue because more the free lime I will have cement will have unsoundness. So soundness of test of cement is related to free lime soundness test of cement is related to free lime or free magnesium. This is tested using leachator jet alias apparatus which is nothing but a split cylinder split cylinder which is nothing but a split cylinder with 30 millimeter in a diameter and 30 millimeter height. So in a diameter is 30 millimeter and height is 30 millimeter and it is 165 mm long indicator. So it has got two indicators you see split cylinder and there is a split here and there are two indicators here. So what do you do paste of standard consistency plates is stored in this word in in in stored in water after covering with glass plates and distance between these indicators are measured. So you make paste inside this mold right and covered with glass plate at 18 degree centigrade 18.91.1 degree centigrade and after that you measure. So allow the hydration to progress measure the distance between this indicator. The distance is measured right is recorded and then it is boiled for one hour at 100 degree centigrade and this distance is again measured. If the difference is less than 10 millimeter difference less than 10 millimeter it is fine. If not a second test after aeration of the cement is done and then the difference should be less than 5 millimeter. Magnetium so this is how soundness is measured. So lime free lime available it will cause expansion because it will become slack at lime and it will cause expansion soundness test common soundness test is done by this. Magnetia test for magnesium free magnesium is done by autoclip test. So you put it under pressure put it under pressure and high temperature right curated high temperature and using that autoclip test you can determine magnesium not very common but this test is relatively common. Strength test of cement is done not directly because cement is never used as neat cement and again this test is a means of comparing two cements. It does not give us you know you are trying to compare the strength potential of two cements strength potential of two cements not really anything to do with the strength of cement or cement paste hydrated cement paste not really. We are interested in finding out the strength potential of cement as a material hydrated cement paste is strength you know we are not trying to look into that microstructure gel strength and things like that nothing. This is a tool for comparing or this is a test method for comparing comparing two cements the strength potential in concrete system if we may say so. So what we do we test actually motor cubes for compressive compressive strength so we use test on motor one is to three one cement three sand and this sand is standard sand is standardized so that standard and the cube size is 7.07 centimeter square side length in other words 7.07 this will be 50 centimeter square. So you test 50 centimeter square cube and cast them in standard manner mixing water is related to consistency by a formula or 10 percent by mass of dry material total dry material close you know cement and sand 10 percent by mass of dry material or in some course it is related to to speed standard consistency right. So then this is cast this cubes are cast demolded after 24 hours and cure for 7 or 28 days this casting is done in a standard manner. Even compaction is done in a standard manner the vibration has to be in a standard mold standard vibrating machine everything else is standardized you standard cement the cement in standard sand only cement is a variable quantity of water is fixed by the code related to consistency or as I said some cases 10 percent of the mass 10 percent by mass of dry material and then demolded after 24 hours and cured within it is fixed temperature specified temperature for 7 days or 28 days and then tested wet tested wet in a standard manner at 35 MPa rate of loading per minute. So at a fixed rate of loading because all this affects the strength of those cubes the rate of loading and the material itself will depend upon its you know hydration etcetera depend upon curing condition. So you fix the curing condition temperature is fixed temperature of curing is fixed temperature of casting is fixed casting is done in a standard manner the only variable is cement. So you can compare 2 cement they are strength potential in concrete by this test although it is not necessary that you have a higher strength cement you will get the proportional increase in strength of concrete that is not necessary but this can compare 2 cement and you can have specifications of cement based on this test results. So if you have higher strength it will have higher potential especially gravity is measured by leachatoleous plus which looks something like this which looks something like this right and we put first liquid something like kerosene which do not react with cement and the increase in volume is what is observed there are graduations here. So you put the cement first the liquid fill it up then put those solids see how much is the increase in volume this is weight fixed mass. So what you are doing first is this leachatoleous plus is filled with kerosene then no mass of cement is added from measurement and increase in volume is found out. So from increase in volume volume of this cement is found out by driving air bubbles so you drive out all the air bubbles and find out you know how much due to by putting this solids here in the flask which was filled with liquid like kerosene before how much is the increase in volume. So this volume of this particle are measured is mass is known specific gravity can be found out typically it is 3.15. So I think this is what largely we wanted to discuss today but I will discuss types of cement in the next class because what we know is the hydration process is a function of the compound composition. Depending upon type of compound hydration will progress at a faster amount of compound which compound has got how much quantity because we have seen C3S is responsible for high energy. Similarly C3A is responsible for high heat of hydration so if I manipulate the composition of the cement properties can be altered. So when we discuss type of cement we will discuss this so we will discuss this from this slide onwards in the next class that by modifying composition you know and physical properties because physical properties means fineness for example. So by modifying physical properties and composition of cement the properties can be changed favorably to obtain various types of cements and this is what we will discuss in the next class. For example OPC is the first type of cement RHPC is the second kind of cement rapid hardening Portland cement, ordinary Portland cement, low heat Portland cement, sulfate resisting cement, blended cement of various kinds and super sulfate cement. We will discuss all of them white cement, so many other expensive cement which will expand and various other kinds of cement. So I think with this you know this would be the composition I will look into this in the next class. So with this we can summarize types of cement we will discuss in the next class we have actually discussed to the porosity which we could not do in the last class so we continue from there. We will discuss the various formulae derived various formulae for porosity some numerical problems can be solved easily on those. I really did not solve a numerical problem but simply you can find and estimate the porosity using those formulae. Then we also looked into some properties of the cement and corresponding tests and we introduced you types of cement. Next class we will look into the types of cement and detail. So thank you very much. === Lecture 5 Transcript === Welcome to module 1 lecture 5 of Concrete Technology. We are discussing on types of cement and its use today. We just started that in the last class in fact, so continuing from that point we will be proceeding today. We just mentioned in the last class that by you know manipulating the chemical composition of the compounds of cement or in other words oxides composition of the cement which in turn allows you to manipulate the compound composition of cement somewhat. And then by changing their physical characteristics, we can alter the properties of the cement and their performance in concrete. Therefore, we can get different varieties of cement. In addition to this other material, other supplementary cementitious material like various Pozolena I will mention what they are or some other material such as limestone powder. So, by using those materials you can get additional cement which are known as blended cement or composite cement. So, we will look into those as well. So, pure cements blended and composite cement, this is what we will look into. So, general outline of our discussion would therefore, to remain type of cement followed by lime followed by supplementary cementitious material such as fly ash, slag, silica fume, and etc. So, therefore, we can look into first the pure cements and the modified cements. What we said I repeat it again by modifying the composition and physical properties performance of cement can be changed, favorability, favorably to obtain different types of cement. So, composition chemical composition of the cement can be changed and their physical characteristics can also be changed in order to get different types of cements. So, what are the types of cements? Well, ordinary Portland cement is the most commonly used cement for many many years. However, currently perhaps it is not the most commonly used cement because some of the blended cements have become quite popular all over the world. This cement is known as type 1 cement as far as American society of testing material ASTM or cement 1, same 1 as per EN 197 1 that is the European standard. So, as a case with Indian or any other country standard in Indian standard IS 269 deals with 33 grade of OPC cement. So, this is the specific and other cements like 43 and 53 grade which are classification by Indian standard. They are OPC also OPC grade. So, OPC is 269 they are called OPC cement simply. Now, this is specific to Indian scenario. We talk of OPC grades 33, 43 and 53 grade 33 is that cement which exhibits 28 days. So, this is the motor you know yesterday or last class we discussed about strength test of cement. So, 5 cm 50 cm square base motor cube test when you do if the strength is more than 33 MPA F that is strength. If it is greater than 33 MPA, then it is more than 33 MPA. If you call it grade 33 cement in Indian context. Similarly, when it is more than 43, when it is more than 43, the strength is more than 43 MPA 28 days standard motor cube strength is more than 43 MPA you call it grade 43. And if it is more than 53 MPA, then you call it 53 grade. And we have three different codes for this. This is IS 269 deals with this one, this particular one and that is the originally used ordinary Portland cement. So, that is as per Indian standard is concerned. S T M of course, classify OPC as type 1 and OPC as type 1. S M 1 is what E N 197 1 says that is the European standard. B S standard also used to call it I mean now it is all integrated all European codes are integrated and this is S M 1 S per European standard. Then the next cement is rapid hardening Portland cement R H P C stands for rapid hardening Portland cement. So, rapid hardening Portland cement R H P C stands for rapid hardening Portland cement. So, rapid hardening Portland cement, it is A S T M type 3. So, R H P C there is a code in Indian code of course, there is R H P C. So, this cement hardens fast. So, you get the strength you know possibly 3 day strength in one day, 7 day strength in 3 days and 28 day strength is nearly 3 day you know 7 days and so on so forth. So, you get high R D strength, you get high R D strength, high R D strength. We will look into it how it is obtained. So, high R D strength, high R D strength that is the characteristics. Special R H P C which could be with OPC plus calcium fluoroelluminate plus a retarder will come back to this a little bit later on. First we will try to understand what is R H P C OPC maybe we will come back to this slide again back if required. So, that is special rapid hardening cement is one which hardens much faster. So, they are basically fluoroelluminate type of cement. Then you have got low heat Portland cement A S T M type 4. Now, this is A S T M type 3 and this is A S T M type 4. Now, A S T M type 4 is low heat low heat cement you know. Now, this is a low heat cement was used largely low heat cement was used largely for mass concrete construction R D R mass concrete construction R D R right. It was used R D R for mass concrete construction. So, this type 4 heat of hydration produced is low. So, that is why it is called low heat cement rate of heat evolution will be low and how it is done will look into. Then sulphate resisting cement which is A S T M type 5. I will come to type 2 A S T M type 5 is sulphate resisting cement. And again we will see how these cement are actually how do we manipulate the composition of the compounds in cement to obtain all this. Then of course, we have blended and composite cement super sulphated cement is a sulphate resistant cement. We will come back to this slide a little bit later on and white cement is used for decorative purposes. Expensive cement used for filling in grout holes or you know shrinkage compensation compensating cement. So, you want to fill in cracks or similar situation. Well cement cement is used in you know oils oil wells petroleum crude oil wells actually they have special setting characteristics specific setting characteristics, stringent setting characteristics and of course, they should be sulphate resistance. So, we will look into some of this in details and maybe we will come back again to this slide if requires. Now, if you recall you know say same one that is your type 1 type 1 cement A S T M type 1 or O PC this is O PC had roughly around 59 percent of C 3 S 15 percent of could be something of this order 15 20 55 etcetera etcetera. This is one O PC let us say C 3 A 12 C 4 8 and as calcium sulphate this is 2.9 and free lime could be something like this loss on ignition 1.2. So, this composition will satisfy O PC this composition will satisfy O PC. Now, if we recall that high C 3 S means relatively high R D strength. So, this is the slightly higher could be even less something like 54 54 55 etcetera. So, high C 3 S means high R D strength C 2 S means let us strength C 3 A means heat of hydration high heat of hydration it contributes maximum to the heat of hydration and this is of course, much less effect calcium sulphate again has does not have much of an effect anywhere and free lime of course, is as restricted as anywhere it should be loss on ignition should be almost similar for all. So, major effect comes from the quantity of C 3 S present and C 3 S got a role in type 4 cement which is low heat cement. So, let us see let us see one by type 2 cement is called modified cement it is actually somewhere between type 4 and type 2 it is not exactly low heat, but it is between this two. So, let us go downwards type 2 I will come to time 2 later on come to type 3. Now, this has got the highest C 3 S this has got the highest C 3 S therefore, it has got the highest C 3 S therefore, it it is it would give you high R D strength remember recall type 3 is nothing, but R H PC rapid hydrating Portland cement and it has got the highest C 3 S least C 2 S compared to this two it has got the least C 2 S. So, it will have high R D strength least long term strength would not be there as much and C 3 A content is relatively high again not very high almost similar as O PC C 4 content F content is almost similar rest of the things are more or less similar. Now, therefore, this cement is rapid hydrating cement because chemical composition wise this is the this has got the highest C 3 S physically of course, fineness fineness governs high fineness higher the fineness rate of hydration will be high and therefore, strength development will be faster. So, physically R H PC has two thing C 3 S is highest C 2 S is least because after all if you increase the C 3 S is the you have to reduce down something. So, C 3 S C 2 S so, it is highly a light lot of a light component the light is less and then it has got high fineness that is that is why it reacts faster than any other cement you know. So, therefore, he rate of hydration is more. So, that is rapid hydrating Portland cement very special variety of this will have high fineness you know which you want to set even quickly a jet cement which will set very fast. Now, some special cement of this kind was can be developed using composition of fluorolubinate you see special rapid hydrating Portland cement can be generated with calcium fluorolubinate and some sort of retarder. So, this is this reacts extremely fast and sets also very quickly and it is grinded to a very fine level. So, this cement is likely to be costly because you are grinding it. So, grinding energy you know you spend some energy in grinding and therefore, it is likely to be costly. So, that is what is a you know rapid hydrating Portland cement is and special rapid hydrating Portland cement uses chloro calcium fluorolubinate with OPC and retarder and that gives you you know fluorolubinant system can give you high alde strength. So, now, next we can go to type 4 which is low heat cement. Now, what gives heat of hydration maximum the maximum heat of hydration comes from C 3 A maximum heat of hydration comes from C 3 A. So, therefore, you can see the reduction here maximum heat of hydration is here. Therefore, this is reduce C 3 A content is only 5 percent and further to reduce the heat of hydration because this reacts early C 3 S reacts early. So, this is also much less, but long term strength will be better. So, this is low heat cement low heat cement rest of the things of course, there is some changes, but not very significant marginal. So, low heat cement will have less C 3 A less C 3 S less C 3 A as well as less C 3 S. Then, something has to increase and it is the C 2 S which increases it will we have will not have extraordinary grinding. In fact, the blames fineness in case of type 3 would be much higher than type 2, but here the blames fineness may not be higher. It could be same as 2 25 meter square per kg minimum and this could be much higher may be 3 100, 5 400 or so or even higher depending upon the type how you know hardening you want may be 700 meter square per kg and so on. So, depending upon that situation. So, this is type 4 this is type 4 this is type 1. Now, 2 is in between which is called modified cement as per American society of test material classification. So, this is type 2 cement, STM type 2 cement is modified cement you know type 2 is the modified cement as we call it it is the modified cement and modified cement is something in between. It has got low heat of hydration, low heat of hydration, but not as low as this. Low heat of hydration also means the strength development rate will be slower. Therefore, you demolding time will be higher. So, this is compromised between the 2 low heat is modified cement is compromised between the 2. It has got somewhat higher C 3 S than this and obviously, C 2 S also will be lower than this, but higher than this C 3 content is also more than this etcetera etcetera. Now, why do you use OPC well most of the construction was carried out with OPC earlier, but in a mass concrete you cannot use OPC because heat of hydration is very high. In mass concrete large size has got volume to surface area ratio very high. Surface area is small volume is very high. If your thickness of the lift a particular lift you know you are concreting lift because concrets are concrete casting is done in stages height wise. So, if you have a very wide very large area and it is sufficiently large thickness which is the case in case of say gravity dam some of those plane concrete retaining wall etcetera etcetera strength is low, but the heat of hydration is usually strength of the concrete required strength of the concrete is usually low, but heat of hydration heat of hydration is a point there because because of the surface area being small compared to the volume or surface area per unit volume being small heat dissipation rate is generally small. Now, if the surface is not able to dissipate the heat there will be you know surface is not dissipate the heat sufficiently from the core. So, it can so happen that core is at higher temperature compared to the surface surface is in contact with the outside air. So, it has lost the heat, but the heat coming from the core to the surface that will depend upon the thermal properties of the concrete material concrete system and it is not very high it is a nearly insulating material. We will discuss about that sometime later on, but heat from the core of the concrete is quite often is unable to reach to the surface as a result differential temperature gradient may exist in case of mass concrete very thick rough and such situations, but you do not you know and this differential temperature if it is existing can cause cracking because inside is warm outside is cool. So, you know differential contraction can occur and that can result in cracking. So, we will look into that cracking later on, but what we understand at this moment is that heat dissipation is a requirement for mass concrete. Now, well if I generate you know you can stop heat generation itself. So, that dissipation required will be less. So, therefore, you use low heat of hydration cement. So, low heat cement are used in mass concrete and that is why you reduce down your you reduce down your C 3 s content. So, usage of low heat cement is in mass concrete. If you look at rapid hydrating cement, you like to use it in places where you want the strength gain to be very high. For example, where you want to pre stress the structural element, you want to apply pre stress force you know you apply external force Aldi. Load has to come Aldi let us say or pre stress force has to come Aldi. Perhaps you are aware of what is pre stress you pre stress the concrete in compression so, that it can take lot more tension than it was capable ofwithstanding without pre stress. So, that that again we might discuss that sometime later on some in some other context. So, where you want to do Aldi you know you want to release the mold Aldi you want to pre stress the concrete etcetera wherever you want high Aldi strength there you will be using rapid hydrating Portland cement, but it is costly. Second aspect is quick setting that is a separate issue. Setting is quite you know setting require rapid hydrating Portland cement do not have setting time Aldi setting time it sets same minimum 30 minutes same specification as the ordinary Portland cement, but you can have something called quick setting cement might use it in repair work may be some sort of construction in under water or near stream and things like that where you want it to set Aldi a jet cement will of course, set very fast. So, the usage of this two cement you have seen three this cement cement three and this two two is somewhere in between. So, therefore, where you do not want that kind of heat of hydration as this generation you know lower low heat of hydration as this, but you want some strength development there you will be using this because this will have very slow strength development you have less quantity of this and you do not grind it too much. So, you will have less lower strength development will look into the strength development sometime later on this one has got a very high Aldi strength, but later strength is not good even that can have problems related to durability etcetera etcetera, but at the moment this was the purpose why rapid hydrating cement you know usage is where you want to are this time. Now, coming to type five cement this is sulphate resisting cement. Now, we shall see that when we talk of durability of concrete that sulphate attacks concrete through C 3 A well we can remember or we can recall our discussions earlier discussion we can recall our earlier discussion on a train gite formation we discussed the formation of a train gite if you recall we added gypsum to cement while grinding in order to control the setting property and gypsum reacts with C 3 A. Now, gypsum occupies more volume than the original C 3 A and gypsum combined. So, gypsum combines with C 3 forming a train gite that is what we have seen earlier. Now, this occurs since plastic concrete no problem x you know a train gite occupies more volume well no problem because this can be accommodated in a plastic concrete without cracking, but if gypsum or you know for example, sodium sulphate comes in contact with the concrete moist concrete or in presence of moisture. Sodium sulphate can react with calcium hydroxide to form calcium sulphate and this calcium sulphate can react with C 3 A hydrates forming a train gite and this a train gite now is if tries to occupy more volume than the original reactants it will cause cracking of the concrete that is a sulphate attack anyway we will discuss this at length sometime later on, but at the moment what we got to understand is it is C 3 A which is responsible for sulphate attack you know sulphate attack takes place through C 3 A. So, therefore, in this cement you have least C 3 A 4 to 5 only very small quantity of C 3 A. So, a sulphate resisting cement will have least quantity of C 3 A, but then C 3 A C is also reduced and C 2 A C is also reduced I mean increased somewhat increased somewhat than this. So, C 3 A is C 3 A is reduced, but main aspect is that it should have low C 3 A in case of sulphate resistance. So, these cements have looked into right now will go back to the first slide again. So, physically rapid hydrating Portland cement high fineness 3 25 meter square per kg minimum blends enables early removal of formwork setting same as type 1 as I mentioned. Special rapid hydrating Portland cement OPC plus calcium fluoro aluminate retarder sometime this retarder is a citric acid, setting time can be controlled it has got a very high specific surface 700 to 900 meter square per kg blends specific surface which we discussed yesterday. Low heat Portland cement ASTM type 4 heat of hydration is 250 joules per gram at 7 days, adequate fineness to control strength gain. So, adequate fineness fineness to gain control strength gain, modified cement ASTM type 2 higher rate of hydration than type 4 you know it is in between and type 5 of course, is sulphate resisting cement loss if you that is the characteristics. I will come to blended cement let us go back to some of the cements those were there in the our first slide. So, let us go to the first slide again back right. So, we have looked into this cement we have looked into this cement we have looked into this cement this cement. So, we will be looking now into blended cements super sulphated cement let me just tell you right away and talk about white cement and expensive cement now will come back to the other cements later on. First sulphated cement is prepared from ground granulated blast furnace slag we shall see that ground granulated ground granulated blast furnace slag ground means grinded you know granulated blast furnace slag we will come to this again G G B G G B F S G G G B F S actually G G B F S has got almost you know it has got same oxides as the cement we will see that a little bit later and high quantity of this material is used in super sulphated cement around 80 to 85 percent mainly meant for sulphate resistance and 10 to 15 percent of gypsum with 5 percent OPC. So, you can see that it is not really with OPC but with granulated blast furnace slag granulated ground granulated blast furnace slag is the one which is you know which the cement is prepared. So, this is super sulphated cement now properties of ground granulated blast furnace slag we can see this will not have C 3 A at all no C 3 A no C 3 A in this one no C 3 A in this one. So, the reaction of sulphate is expected to be simply not there. So, it is supposed to be highly highly sulphate resistance white cement essentially is prepared from for aesthetic purpose and prepared from China clay which is white and calcium calcium carbonate source used is chalk. Now, both are white because they are more or less pure right now no iron iron should be present there no other oxides which can add color to it. So, therefore, this cement is costly very costly because you are producing from certain specific raw material China clay and chalk. So, it same all similar properties same like like you know OPC's similar type of composition would be like OPC's but only thing is no iron no other such oxides which can add color. So, this is why it is white cement and it is used for you know where you want aesthetic one example of course, in India in the city of New Delhi is a Bahaite temple the Lotus temple it used white cement because it is absolutely spark sparking white and then marble stones white marble stones have been used as aggregate. So, it is totally white completely white. So, when you want to give a complete white look this is what is used. Expensive cement or shrinkage compensating cement are those ones which are used to fill in let us say crack or gap or ground holes. So, that after expansion you know it will compensate the shrinkage right. So, the system essentially involves a cry calcium sometime lime system sometime illuminate system illuminates same at range I to reaction is utilized maybe I will discuss this a little bit more later on while well cement has got high sulphate resistance and setting properties are strictly controlled anyway. Now, we can go further ahead and discuss on the other issues of different types of cement blended cement for example, blended cement. Now, this blended cement uses Pozolona a material I might have mentioned earlier in the heat free when I is talking in the introduction right. So, that is what yeah. So, before that just expensive cement let us cover it up fully high alumina cement with OPC and dip cement because you see a train jet formation would occur with this one high alumina cement and dip some and this a train jet occupies more volume than the original reactant therefore, it causes expansion. So, expensive effect of high alumina cement together with OPC and dip some is used in expensive cement other compositions are dip some box side you know is aluminum ore and chalk. So, they are burnt together. So, they are produced similar sort of things are produced, but burning dip some box side and chalk together and this forms expanding agent that can be used in OPC and slag. So, this is what is a expensive cement there are some lime based expensive cement as well. The strength that we are looking into if you look in the because different types type 1 type 2 type 3 and type 4 type 5 cement if you look at it right. Now, type 1 if you see this is our OPC strength development is somewhere here type 3 high alumina strength. So, it has got high alumina strength, but it is long term strength is infact slightly lower than the OPC modified cement if you look at it this is modified cement type 2 somewhere there modified cement it has got low initial strength then OPC, but long term strength is better because more C 2 S type 4 has got least initial strength right which is which is low heat because it has got less C 3 S as well. So, more C 2 S as we have seen earlier since it has got high C 2 S it has got better long term strength, but very little early strength heat of hydration is low that is the thing early strength requirement is not there. So, we will not use this cement where demolding early demolding is a requirement surely not use this cement. The fate resisting cement has got properties less C 3 S, less C 3 S so somewhat lower early strength then type 1 or OPC cement, but long term strength is again better than OPC cement surely. So, this is how the strength development of different cement takes place and now we understand also why does it occur that way because we know what are the compounds there and what is the physical properties. Finest physical properties will be of rapid hardening portal and cement and it will have maximum C 3 S, low heat cement will have least C 3 A and C 3 S, sulphate resisting cement will have low C 3 A and naturally C 3 S is also reduced a little bit and therefore, the strength initial strength is low. So, all these cement has got initial strength low, but they have got better long term strength. This cement has got better early strength, but long term strength is worse than the ordinary Portland cement. Now, let us come to blended cement, but before that we let us understand a little bit about this material lime. You know as I mentioned in the very first days discussion module 1, lecture 1, we said that lime was used as a cementing material prior to cement. Currently of course, use for repair of historical monument to match the properties of original material. So, lime has been in use as a construction material much before actually cement was invented. Lime has been used as I said that is reported it has been used something like 7000 years back as reported by Professor Ayrann Ben-Tur in one of his article in 2000 around 2001. So, this has been used for 7000 years. Now, in India of course, we have used lime together with what is called surki which is nothing, but when you burn the clay the dust that remains below the brick kiln is called surki. So, it is burned clay some form of fine powdered burnt clay will come to that. Now, lime itself are two types hydraulic and non hydraulic lime, non hydraulic lime sets when excess water evaporates and calcium hydroxide reacts with carbon dioxide to from calcium carbonate. So, non hydraulic lime sets when it has got excess water and that evaporates and carbon dioxide from the atmosphere will react with it forming calcium carbonate therefore, the setting occurs. Hydraulic lime on the other hand it has got active clay and reaction of lime with clay leads to cementing property. So, hydraulic lime and non hydraulic lime this will have some active clay in it and reaction of clay with lime causes you know leads to cementing property. Now, this is what has been used for many many years. So, what we know is that some material some silica can react with lime to produce C H S gel extracture you know lime with clay that is what we said lime with contains active clay and reaction of clay and lime leads to cementing property. Now, this was actually discovered pretty early like volcanic ashes I mentioned in Roman civilization they used volcanic ash together with lime and they found that it can give the similar cementing property in India as I said lime and surki. Surki is you know after burning the clay the dust that is the fine particles which are there that is that is what is surki. So, if that is nothing but bricks are manufactured from clay. So, therefore, that is nothing but burnt quickly you know you burn the clay heat it up I mean not burning really heating it up to sufficiently high temperature may be 400 degree centigrade and cooling it rapidly rapidly because that dust which comes out from the clay bricks they just get deposited on to the ground and therefore, they started losing their heat very fast rapidly start cooling and the finer ones of those one can react with lime and that is what is the news in many of the monuments lime surki construction has been pretty well known. Similarly, the volcanic ash with lime also can react and produce cementing material. Now, these materials are nothing but you see lime is calcium if it was lime means calcium hydroxide plus the silica or alumina in presence of water. So, you see the same ingredients as the cement. So, actually they produce CHS and gel CHS gel. Now, from the original name of the volcanic ashes this class of materials are called Pozolana. So, the Pozolana are those material they are basically reactive silica which reacts with lime in presence of water to produce CHS gel. Volcanic ash are natural Pozolana and surki of course, is not natural Pozolana. So, there are many natural Pozolanas but there are certain other industrial I will not call it waste nor call it by product, but I will call it industrial product because from this from you know for a student on concrete technology it is not a waste product, but thermal power plant would of course, they they treat this material as a waste. So, many other many other products from industrial products they also show this kind of property Pozolana city or Pozolana behavior that means, they react with lime. Now, consider this material fly ash it is a product from thermal power plant collected at electrostatic precipitators thermal power plant collected at electrostatic precipitators. I will discuss this somewhat in more details when you talk of mineral admixtures coal as obtained from the mines contains lot of impurity mainly the clay because clay is the material abundantly available on the earth surface earth crust top of the earth crust or from those zones where we mine the coal or do any mining for that matter. So, whenever you are trying to extract anything from the mines it contains sufficient amount of clay. This clay which is present as impurity in the coal is grinded together with the coal. If you wash the coal of course, some of it will go away. However, it is impossible to remove all this clay from the coal from the ore actually and this is this coal is I mean sorry from the coal and the coal is grinded and after grinding the coal is burnt. So, this is the coal is carbon the carbon sulphur they will actually get converted into carbon dioxide or sulphur dioxide etcetera and many other no x and so on. Small quantities of those are also there they will go away. What about clay it is SiO 2 L 2 O 3 SiO 2 L 2 O 3 etcetera L 2 O 3 Fe 2 O 3 this materials will remain. So, this is the material of the clay and the clay. Now, since they are very those fines ones from this they will remain as ash they will remain as ash. Now, this ash material the finer ones from this ash material will actually go away with the flu gas and it is trapped in electrostatic precipitators. We discuss this at somewhat at length when we talk of mineral admixtures slightly more. So, they will be captured at electrostatic precipitators for environmental reasons you cannot throw them to the environment because they are health hazard. So, it collected in electrostatic precipitators and if you can handle them dry then this material shows pozzolanic property. In other words this is actually clay grinded heated to a very high temperature around 1800 degree centigrade and then suddenly exposed to air at 25 degree centigrade. So, they rapidly cool like surki which cools rapidly like volcanic ash which cools rapidly the clay material heated up very fast and then cooled rapidly this material is also cooled rapidly. So, when you cooled rapidly actually its structure remains amorphous. So, fine amorphous material and you know amorphous material can react compared to crystalline materials which are stable. We will discuss this point sometime more sometime during mineral you know discussion on mineral admixtures more on to this. So, fly ash is a is a pozzolanic material but not only fly ash ground granulated blast furnace slag ground granulated blast furnace slag actually iron ore also contains clear impurity and when one removes the ones to remove it in the blast furnace slag lime is added to remove it. So, then lime reacts with or lime gets mixed up not really lime lime the hot condition gets mixed up with the clay that is silica and this two together then form what is called slag. The slag will be floating over the slag will be floating over the molten iron which can be drained from the bottom and slag is taken away floating slag is taken from the top. When you grind it granulated this also contains both lime as well as silica. Therefore, this also can react under conducive condition. So, this also shows some similar property as this but before that it can also show some sort of cementing property. So, this is the main pozzolanous besides that silica fume is relatively recent addition to the classes of Pozzolanous. This comes from silicon and ferro silicon industries where quartz is heated up to high temperature as high as 1800 degree centigrade to obtain pure silica and the fume that comes out when it is condensed what is produced is called micro silica. Contents largely silica silicon dioxide alone the other materials are very small and is extremely fine size. This material is very important because this is the one which has made it possible to generate produce high strength concrete very high strength concrete or even high strength concrete some of those high strength concrete to self. So, this is another one rise has is another kind of Pozzolona rise has as if you process it up you know finally, it will be silica. So, if you process it up you can get another pozzolanic material because has when you burn it rise has when you burn it it will carbon shear material will burn away leaving the silica and aluminious aluminious you know those materials and they will form the Pozzolona. So, one thing common in all this case that silica aluminum material largely silica in many cases they are heated up and cooled very rapidly generally they have amorphous structure. The reaction that is Pozzolonic reaction is is S strength for silica CH is calcium hydroxide and water produces CHS gel. Now, if you look at it C 3 S and water was producing CHS gel, but it was producing CH as well. So, this CH if I put some amount of this Pozzolona in the cement cement will react with water forming calcium hydroxide and this calcium hydroxide can react with the silica in presence of water to form the CHS gel again. This is called Pozzolonic reaction and in blended cement this reaction is very much utilized. Typical some of those Pozzolona just I have listed down for example, fly ash at type F I will discuss type F later on and type C is another kind of fly ash. You can see SiO 2 silica fume SiO 2 is more than 85 percent in fact, GGBFS SiO 2 is of this order and AL 2 O 3 aluminum oxide. So, their oxides are same as cement in ordinary Portland cement this was around 64 65 percent this was around 20 percent you know if you recall only thing is the oxide same oxides are there, but the oxide composition quantity of oxides have changed. Now, here C A O varies from 5 to 10 percent is type F fly ash in type C it is 10 to 40 percent silica fume less than 1 percent slag it is 30 to 50 percent. SiO 2 you can see the silica silica silica in this is of this order where this is very high. So, same oxides as the O PC cement, but the proportions are different largely the SiO 2 which can react with wherever SiO 2 is large this shows extremely high Pozzolonic reaction. So, this materials can be put into the cement and partially you know mixed up with the cement clinker to form what you call blended cement. So, Pozzolon's are added make composite cement adding may be more than 1 1 or 2 of this ones. So, today there is all possibilities you can add up cement fly ash slag all together and make cement utilize the best property of all of them. So, blended cement are essentially cement where we add one of the Pozzolon's Pozzolon's together with cement blend them together fly ash together with fly ash when Portland Pozzolon's cement is produced what is done is you actually take the Portland cement clinker one of the popular roots there are other roots also Portland cement clinker grind the fly ash together with the gypsum together with the gypsum to get what is called Pozzolon's Pozzolon's cement. By proper grinding and adding additives you can actually compensate for somewhat slow strength development in case of Pozzolon's strength development is relatively slow for two reasons one the reaction itself is relatively slow. Second reason is that Pozzolon depends upon reaction of the reaction of the Pozzolon depends upon the reaction of the Pozzolon depends upon the reaction of the Pozzolon depends upon the reaction of the Pozzolon depends upon the reaction of the cement because calcium hydroxide when if it is produced then only the Pozzolon can be when you know can react with the calcium hydroxide. So, this is we will discuss this sometime later on when we talk of mineral admixtures. Now, let us see the schematically where the oxide composition stands for OPC this is OPC this is OPC for OPC this is OPC this is OPC this is OPC now calcium hydroxide is around 60 percent very small quantity of AL2 and relatively small quantity so calcium hydroxide 100 percent is here 100 percent AL2 O3 is here and 100 percent SIO2 is here. So, you can see that it has got high CAO small quantity of SIO2 and small quantity of AL2 O3 we come to Pozzolona it has got high SIO2 and small quantity of L2 O3 small quantity of L2 O3 sorry this will be this will have similar AL2 O3 not this one. So, this will have parallel lines has to be done right this is the AL2 O3 right maximum CAO line will be like this CAO line will be like this and SIO2 line will be like this. So, SIO2 will increase in this direction you know together. So, this one has got this one has got this much amount of calcium hydroxide because calcium hydroxide 0 is this line 0 100 is here calcium hydroxide is small in Pozzolona slag it is somewhat higher calcium hydroxide calcium oxide but less than the OPC you look for SIO2 SIO2 is 100 percent here this has got maximum SIO2 slag steel has got more SIO2 than OPC OPC has got this much SIO2 aluminum oxide 0 here 100 percent here. So, all have got low AL2 O3. So, you see their oxides are same only proportions are differing and this diagram also shows same thing. Now, let us see their hydration characteristics. If you see hydration product of Portland cement this was my Portland cement and recall these are inner product H stands for hydration product gel inner product this is inner product this is the Portland cement original grain boundary and so is this is hydration product this is my aggregate and here I will have calcium hydroxide coming into picture this this place I will have calcium hydroxide C which is non-ceiling precipitate. So, here I will have calcium hydroxide non-ceiling precipitate of calcium hydroxide right. So, this this this this is what we will have calcium non-ceiling precipitate of calcium hydroxide you will have and outer product obviously the outer product will also be there. Now, if I look at right and this will fill in gradually as much as boyce it can fill in but if you look at reaction with slag this is my Portland Pozole and this is my slag now slag remember has got calcium oxide also. So, it has got almost cement like composition only thing is it has got less calcium hydroxide. So, it should react with water itself but it does not it reacts in presence of an activator. So, you can activate the slag slag will react if you can activate the slag slag will be here. So, the activation of the slag is required and cement various materials in cement when it reacts with water for example, gypsum alkyl is etcetera can act as an activator. So, slag is an you know slag can also hydrate and hydrogen product of slag is here and because it has got excess silica this can react with the calcium hydroxide that was there originally and it can produce z which is you know pozole material we said that z is nothing but product of pozoleic reaction. So, you will find that pozoleic reaction product is here and since it is more CHS gel and not calcium hydroxide calcium hydroxide is actually a non-silent precipitate does not have bonding capacity but CHS gel has. So, slag converts excess silica in slag converts the calcium hydroxide into CHS which is more of a bonding or sealing material thereby it provides better microstructure in terms of you know cementing property porosity etcetera becomes capillary porosity becomes lower. So, is the case with fly ash these are the aggregates this is the aggregate this is the pozole nut but then this does not react on its own this does not react on its own right and calcium hydroxide coming from here can produce pozoleic material here and seal. So, calcium I both this materials consumes calcium hydroxide and then seal does non-silent precipitate is reduced out. So, blended cement are blended cement are produced from this one important issue is that such cements when you produce by inter grinding gypsum clinker and the pozole nut their strength initial strength is lower but long term strength is better particularly with fly ash on so is the case with slag but silica fume can show you high R D strength as well. We will discuss this sometime later on composite cements Portland pozole nut cement Portland silica fume cement Portland limestone cement now this limestone is just a new way you know you can you can add small amount of limestone it is not purely inert material say 15 to 17 percent limestone has been added to the cement system and it has been observed that it can form compounds like calcium monocarbol illuminate which has got some sort of bonding properties. So, some amount of limestone are used but otherwise limestone are used as a filler definitely it definitely is a filler increase the paste content or cohesiveness of the paste. So, this we will discuss sometime later on in the case of mineral red mixtures Portland cement with raw mill raw mill dust so raw mill dust that is dust of clinker or dust of limestone they can be added to fine lime that can be added to the cement and they seems to also improve properties some of them going to the blended cement as well. So, you can have multi component blended cement for example, slag fly ash everything together there is another cement with high bellite that is C 3 C 2 S high C 2 S cement there is something like modified cement strength development to be slower and very high strength system like densified to small particles and macro defect free formulations will discuss in the context of higher high you know they use both use silica fume some use polyvinyl alcohol will discuss about this and high alumina cement combination will discuss about this when you talk of high strength material. So, these are other such formulations cementitious formulation well benefits from the supplementary cement material are since they you reduce down the cement clinker carbon dioxide emission is reduced fly ash being an environmentally hazardous material can be stored can be used in cement therefore, they can give you sustainability in high volume fly ash concrete use as much as 50 percent fly ash will discuss this sometime later on in high performance concrete silica fume is generally used high strength concrete in fact, very high strength concrete M D F D S P N R P C use silica fume, but it is costly very costly in Indian scenario 7 to 8 times that of cement potential of rise ash ash ash is well it is yet to be really verified and getting popular in this country. One more cement I will just before we stop is the limest you know high alumina cement this was used extreme very much earlier generally produce from limestone or chalk and boxite with small silica. So, this will have high quantity of C calcium a illuminate of kind C A and C 5 A 3 not C A C in a C 3 A, but this is the product that is form the first product form is calcium hydro a C A H T H 10 after hydration slightly different than what we used to get earlier, but this product is unstable and it gets converted into C 3 A H 6 finally, since this occupies more volume than this this final product occupies less volume than the original material thereby causes what is called extra porosity it results in porosity in the structure final hardened structure because of this phenomena known as conversion no rapid setting, but all the strength and rapid hardening this has been observed. Absence of calcium hydroxide result in better sulphate resistance, but this cement because of this conversion phenomena is not really popular you say high alumina cement are good refractory material. So, therefore, today what we looked into is a cement types lime supplementary cement issues material we will discuss about the supplementary cement issues more material more in detail because they not only you can produce them in with cement you know you can use them in cement, but they can be sometime I mean they can be added directly of course, sometime I say this correct because you are adding one more ingredients into the system. So, they can be added directly to the cement concrete as an admixtures so at this at that point of time some of those issues related to Poisson and Ossimment we will discuss and we also talked about usage and advantages. The only cement out of all this is a high alumina cement which is not being used much anymore because of this problem of conversion originals shows high its original product formed has got high volume final product occupies less volume therefore, it results in some pore formation and that is how it actually you know creates a porous structure and it has not been found very suitable thus our C3A cement has is uses has been highly restricted. I think with this we finish our discussion on cement and the first module thank you. === Lecture 6 Transcript === Welcome to concrete technology. Module 2, module 2 deals with aggregates, module 2 deals with aggregates and today in the lecture 1, we shall be looking into requirements of aggregates, photographic classification, effect of size, shape and texture. So, let us see what is requirements of aggregates. Basically, if you recall when we looked at concrete, concrete consists of cement paste matrix, if I may say so with aggregate particles embedded in the cement paste matrix and in normal concrete, the aggregates which actually forms a skeleton is about 65 to 70 percent and paste is the rest of it. So, this 65 to 70 percent is a you know large quantity, it occupies the major volume of concrete in normal concrete. Now, therefore, why you call it aggregate because aggregation of solid particles other than paste. So, aggregation of solid particle other than paste and that's what we call as aggregates. This is essentially aggregation of solid particles and that's all to be called as aggregate and one major important property is that it must be inert and obviously, since large quantity is used it must be inexpensive, it must be inexpensive. Natural aggregates are formed due to process of weathering and artificial ones are obtained by crushing larger parent mass. Well, I would not call it I mean this is called crushed aggregates actually second one. So, you can have natural aggregates that means, natural gravels or natural sand those forms of natural aggregates as they are available and they are formed by the weathering action on rocks parent rocks. And then the other source of aggregate other than natural ones, naturally available ones are the crushed aggregates. Now, artificial aggregates can be produced from some materials like let us say fly ash. So, this artificial aggregates are of course, separate class of material used for specific purpose, but largely what we used in normal concrete normal strength concrete and even in high strength concrete they are either they are obtained by crushing rocks or they are naturally available material like pebbles, gravels I mean gravels and sand etcetera. Recycled aggregates of course, is a recent concept because of you see the aggregate resources are not infinite aggregate resources are not infinite more and more aggregates are consumed in the concrete the resources is getting reduced. So, there is now a thought that is the process of utilizing recycle aggregate. There is another aspect also there is a you know significant amount of demolition of existing structure concrete structure may occur in future. So, when used demolition structure you get the demolition waste that is the demolition waste similarly construction waste. So, can they be reprocessed in some manner the process and recycle them for use in concrete again this is being looked into and therefore, recycled concrete aggregate is a recent concept. Chemical and mineralogical composition are important porosity strength hardness thermal properties all have their origin in the parent rock. So, the chemical and mineralogical mineralogical composition porosity strength hardness thermal properties it all depends upon the parent rock itself parent rock itself parent rock itself size shape and surface structure these are independent of parent rock but claim major role in concrete size shape and surface structure. So, thermal properties of concrete the porosity chemical composition mineralogical composition they are they you know they they I will be same as the original parent rock itself. But, once you make them get them into appropriate size after crushing or if it is natural you know. So, in itself the shape and the size they have very strong role and surface structure of course, very strong role in concrete well they do not have definite shape and sizes are expressed in terms of square shape size you do not have definite shape. So, you will talk in terms of some sort of qualitative or linguistic terms such as round dead etcetera etcetera they do not have geometrical definite geometrical shape size also varies. So, their sizes are defined in terms of square shape size. So, you have shape square shape and this sizes are what we talk about you know the square shape side length. So, shape size we talk about so size size is related to shape size. So, basically we shape the do what is called shape analysis allow it to pass through square meshes or seams and series of them normally a series of seams should be there and they are conveniently then the aggregate size is conveniently described in terms of size of the opening. So, we do sieve analysis and conveniently relate the size of the aggregate to the size of the mesh square mesh or shape size as square mesh or shape size as we call it. Corsient of linear dimension of opening of a given seam to that of next larger size actually this is the shape sizes many things in nature actually vary do not vary linearly. For example sizes of this particles if you talk in terms of some sort of equivalent diameter or you know through the sieve analysis you find out the size. Then you will find that the sizes varies over a large range. For example, might vary from something like 75.75 millimeter 0.075 millimeter there is 75 micron size to 40 mm or 100 mm or 150 mm or let us say in a given concrete it might vary 75 micron to something like 25 20 millimeter. Now the range is micron means 10 to the power minus 6 millimeter is 10 to the power minus 3 meter. So, you can see the variation the size varies over the range of sizes more than 1000 or nearly 1000 1000 or more. So, such a large range it is convenient to express in terms of log sizes. So, is the case with frequency of let us say mechanical waves or many waves frequency of waves they are also we express them in terms of in logarithmic scale. So, here the sieve sizes we express them in logarithmic scale in geometric progression rather than in arithmetic progression because the range is large it is convenient to express them in geometric progression that is if I have a size x next size will be 2 x next to next size will be. So, it is x 2 x 4 x etcetera etcetera 4 x 8 x and so on. Well this two the quotient therefore, is two. So, quotient of linear dimension of opening of a given side to that of next larger size this quotient of linear dimension this actually we keep constant and most often most often we use this quotient is 2 as 2. So, it is convenient to express the size of particles or aggregates aggregate particles in terms in geometric progression and the quotient size quotient is generally use this two although it could have been anything else but this is most convenient to use and that is what we have been using. Well, therefore, if I have a 10 millimeter maximum size of aggregate nominal maximum size of size of aggregate nominal maximum size of aggregate means majority of the aggregate will be passing through a 10 millimeter size mesh. So, square mesh so 10 mm 10 mm 10 mm. So, when I say that nominal maximum size of aggregate is MSA aggregate is 10 millimeter or abbreviate it as MSA MSA maximum size of aggregate a 10 millimeter. Now, on what I will be talking of MSA and may not be stating this maximum size of aggregate all the time. So, if we understand that this is MSA is equals to 10 millimeter it refers that most of the particle passing through square-sive size opening of 10 millimeter most of it a few small percentage might be retained and this has come from practice how much percentage can be retained is it comes from practice or are given in codes as we understand. Usually in normal structural concrete MSA the ranges up to 40 millimeter. So, in normal structural concrete MSA ranges up to 40 millimeter mostly 20 millimeter and we will see of course, what it depends on the choice of MSA depends on. Now, then we carry out C analysis in continuous series of you know C's and they are reported in terms of percentage passing or retained against SIP size. So, it is in a tabular form usually it is in a tabular form usually you know for example, 20 mm size 10 mm etcetera etcetera and percentage passing. So, maybe 99 percent passing through this if the MSA is 20 mm maybe 50 percent or 60 or 70 percent passing through this etcetera. So, this is how we express. So, we do SIP analysis SIPs are placed one over another a series of them SIPs are placed one over another series of them put the material up and then shake it so that the particles finer them the SIP size will pass down over to the next SIP and some amount will be retained here. So, I can then measure the weights the masses retained from a known mass. So, percentage retained or passing etcetera I can find out and C analysis is done and results are expression in this form. Adjective such as fine or coarse aggregate indicate relative mean size. Fine aggregates has got a smaller relative mean size smaller relative mean size right smaller relative mean size combined aggregate obtain by mixing two or more aggregate usually one finer than other. So, we combine for example, fine aggregate and coarse aggregate both are mixed together we can mix them together and we get combined aggregate and then combined aggregate you know is obtained by mixing in definite proportion usually one fine one the coarse. Well the aggregate passing through 4.75 mm SIP size is important and up to 0.075 millimeter that is 75 micron we call this as fine aggregate we call this as fine aggregate and aggregate retained on 4.75 sizes higher larger than that. So, this is the size of the we call them coarse aggregate sand by and large belongs to above size range you know normal sands normal sand normal sand sand belongs to this size that is natural sand that is available belongs to this size and it often serves as fine aggregate natural sand belongs to the size greater than 0.075 millimeter up to 0.75 mm and it serves as fine aggregate. You know clay silt and clear finer than this size as you know and sand of course, results from natural disintegration and abrasion of rocks sand results from disintegration natural disintegration by wind rain etcetera etcetera and abrasion of rock groups of rocks such as silica minerals quartz, opal, tridemite etcetera etcetera these are the groups. So, classification on the basis of petrography that is mineralogical classification. So, petrographical classes can be in terms of you know minerals for example, quartz, opal, feldspar, mica shears, carbonate, sulfates etcetera etcetera. So, you can classify them in this kind of terms. Now, certain minerals have a little bit of problem that is they are susceptible to what is known as alkali aggregate reaction hence petrograph is important because of the durability issue petrography is important when an aggregate is used for the first time. If it is a proven aggregate it has been used in many structures and it did not exhibit sign of any deterioration or alkali aggregate reaction over many many years then of course, we are sure of it. But if an aggregate is used for the first time not used before then it you know it is petrography must be or it is mineralogical composition must be looked into because some aggregates are susceptible to what is called alkali aggregate reaction. Recall in the first slide itself I said that aggregate must be inert it should not react. Now, certain types of silica like this is one of them certain types of silica such as opal they can react with sodium you know or sodium hydroxide finally of course, in presence of water and form a kind of gel form a kind of gel this gel adsorbs water and increases in volume this gel adsorbs water and increases in volume and this expansion in hardened concrete can cause cracking. We will look into this issue of alkali aggregate reaction in detail when you talk of durability of concrete. So, certain aggregates have such durability problem and cause deterioration of concrete structure. So, petrographic analysis very important because you can then identify the mineralogical composition and the minerals if present in the aggregate can make the concrete susceptible to alkali aggregate reaction. So, you can see that aggregate having satisfactory service records can be compared with aggregate used for the first time to ensure suitability. If you are using it for the first time that is where you got to look into their suitability the one which have been used for long long period of time one in not bothered about them. So, petrography is done in order to find out the mineralogical composition type of minerals present and to identify whether potentially alkali aggregate reactive minerals are present or not. Classification petrographic classification are based on the mineralogical composition like as I said you know dolomite may be limestone calciras, silicias or you know that kind of that kind of nomenclature. So, they are important from alkali aggregate reaction point of view if you know a particular type of mineral which is prone to alkali aggregate reaction then that should be you know that particular aggregate should be tested more and possibly may be may be isolated and not used in concrete construction. Shape is very very important roundness measures the relative sharpness of the edges you know relative sharpness of edges. So, if I have something like this this has got fixed edges sharp edges. So, roundness measures the relative sharpness of edges rounded aggregate has less sharp rounded aggregate has got less sharp edge for example, if this is rounded off the sharp edge would vanish. So, this will be a rounded aggregate normally natural aggregate will have tendency due to abrasion and weathering action the sharp edges will vanish. So, other shape the part initial one was angular shape. So, rounded aggregate have less sharp edges compared to angular aggregate. So, initially it was angular aggregate rounded aggregate will have less sharp edges. Roundness is consequent of you know strength abrasion resistance of pranand rock and where it has it was subjected to. If it is a strong aggregate it is like to be less round because it may not get you know it is edges may not may still be there and abrasion resistance is very important because the edges are going from rounded through abrasive action and where and tear. So, therefore, how much wear it has undergone it will depend upon that a cross aggregate obviously, will have a tendency to remain angular if you have cross it it will have a tendency to remain angular right rounded aggregate natural aggregate through abrasion and wear and tear it might lose its edges and therefore, it may be rounded. In case of cross aggregate nature of the pranand rock crosser type and reduction ratio governs the shape. So, it is a crosser type parent aggregate of course, parent rock crosser type and reduction ratio how much what size you are reducing to all this will govern the shape. River gravels of course, are rounded while cross rocks are angular. So, this is what we must understand by and large cross rocks will be angular and river gravels should be rounded naturally available river sand is also rounded whereas, cross stone if powder if I use stone dust they will be at they will likely to be angular in shape because while crushing it will fail on the possible failure planes and the it is unlikely that it will have a rounded shape the crosser jaws between the crosser jaws it is cross between crosser jaws. So, this you know it is unlikely that it will be rounded so, cross rocks are generally angular cross rocks are angular right. So, shape wise if we look at the classification rounded this is one of the classifications fully on no original faces that that we call as rounded river gravel gravel for example, it will be fully on all where out no original faces. Angular little evidence of where well defined edges you get from cross rocks now there are in between there are various shape classification but, we have just listed down a few here elongated are once which has got length much greater than other dimensions for example, this is an elongated aggregate length greater than any other dimension any other dimension flaky length is greater than width all right length is greater than width but, it is very large compared to thickness compared to thickness. So, shape wise some classification we can do very broad classification there may be many more in between sub angular etcetera etcetera. Now, numerical if we want to express some of this aspect related to shape let us say a is the greatest length maximum length b is the intermediate length and c is the shortest length. So, we defined elongation ratio q as b by a you know elongated is this. So, this is my a b is the intermediate could be even slightly bigger than this let us say b is b is something like this right b is something of this kind all right b is something of this kind all right b is something like this. So, b is b is this and c is the thickness and c is this c is this then elongation ratio is b by a flatness ratio is c by b flatness ratio is c by b right shape factor one can talk in terms of p by q that is flatness ratio divided by elongation ratio and a c by b square a c by b square. Now, if it is elongated b by a if this is small that means this is elongated if this is you know if this is c is small compared to b then it is flat it is flat all right it is flat. So, elongation ratio to flatness ratio gives you shape factor gives you shape factor is one of the ways of quantifying shape codes basically all codes will restrict you use of flaky or elongated aggregates. So, code codes actually restrict the use of flaky and elongated aggregates because they are they would you know they would they would normally create planes of weaknesses when you put them together. So, flaky aggregates if you put them together set of flaky one plate over another one plate over another they will tend to create weak joints in between right we want in fact random. The aggregates should be embedded in paste now here there might be aggregate might be just over another aggregate and weak planes could be created. So, this flaky or elongated aggregates are not desirable they are not desirable a particle is flaky if thickness is 0.6 of mean arithmetic sieve size if a particle is flaky if thickness is less than 0.6 of its mean arithmetic sieve size mean sieve size arithmetic mean sieve size you know mean is calculated on the basis of arithmetic sieve size. So, just sieve size if it is less than 0.6 of the mean sieve size then this is you call it flaky if it is elongated if it is elongated if the length is 1.8 times the mean sieve size. So, you allow it to pass through some sieve and find out is length the longest dimension compared to the sieve size and if it is more than 1.8 because it can still pass through as a vertical simple you know vertically just it can pass through the sieve through the sieve size. So, if the length is more than 1.8 times then we call it elongated flaky is if it is thickness is smaller than 0.6 of the sieve size then. So, you measure the smallest dimension that should not be less than 0.6 of the sieve size through it through which it has pass through you know through which it has passed. So, that is what is flaky and it is the code restics they are used shape a different sieve size then those used for grading well shape and those used for grading well shape of course is defined in terms of you know you have a different sieves then used for grading or sieve analysis the sieve analysis that the sieves that we use for shape in a finding out how much percentage is flaky we use a different sieve then those used for gradings percentage flaky particles by mass of the sample is flakiness index. So, if I have percentage of flaky particle in the material expressed as percentage mass of the sample then we call it that is what is flakiness index. So, flakiness index is defined as the percentage of flaky particle by mass of the total sample if it is less than 50 then you know it should be less than 50 or less than 35 depending upon the usage should be less than 50 or less than 35 depending upon the usage the code gives you this restriction percentage of elongated particle by mass of the sample is elongation index. So, flakiness index should be less than 50 or 35 depending upon the usage codes tells you that way similarly elongated particle you know mass of elongated particle divided by the total mass express as percentage you call it elongation index and that is also restricted by code. Angularity number is defined as 67 percent minus solid volume in a vessel filled in standard manner this is another definition trying to define the shape you fill a container in 3 layer packet up in 3 layer fill this container will aggregate in 3 layer and original volume is known by volume of the vessel is known by filling water by you know it is measured by filling water then you find out the solid volume in the vessel. So, if the solid volume so if the solid volume is known because you know the mass of the aggregate that has gone in divided by the specific gravity of the aggregate that will give you the solid volume 67 minus the solid volume is angularity number because rounded aggregate packs better. So, the 67 has come from there actually it is expected that rounded aggregates will give you a packing quality of 67 when you choose specific sizes. So, this sizes are specified in the code and this specific when you use specific size and pack it in a standard manner you find out what is the volume of solid after packing and that volume 67 minus that volume will give you angularity number the size is generally in the narrow range of 20 to 40 mm or 14 to 10 mm etcetera depending upon the code you know and purpose. So, various codes uses this angle A C I code for example, A C I recommendation uses this angularity number this is what the idea is 67 percent represents the most rounded aggregate and that is why the 67 percent was used. Sphoricity is defined as a function of specific surface ferricity is defined in the is a function of specific surface let us see how it is defined well I will come to this definition little bit later, but for practical usage in concrete mix proportioning in concrete mix proportion when I want to determine the concrete mix proportion two shapes shape classifications are used for simplicity these are simply natural rounded or crust well new of course, some other codes use more than that, but some codes use simply two classification as rounded and crust. So, from shape point of view qualitatively you can talk in terms of simply rounded and crust or then there are many other classification in between sub angular angular you know etcetera etcetera, but quantification is possible in terms of volume diameter for example, volume diameter is a diameter of a sphere having same volume as irregular particle. So, volume diameter of a particle of an aggregate is a diameter of a sphere having same volume. Now, if B P is the volume of a single particle and if I assume that I have a sphere having the same volume then 1 by 6 pi T cube or D 0 V cube as we have defined here will be equals to V P and therefore, volume diameter is volume diameter is given by this expression this is V stands for volume. So, volume diameter is given by this expression surface diameter is the diameter of the sphere of same surface area as the irregular particle. Now, surface area of a sphere is pi D 0 S square you know pi D square is a surface area of a sphere. So, that must be equals to area surface area of the particle. So, therefore, surface diameter is defined in this manner. So, if you have an irregular shape particle if you know its surface area surface area divided by pi and if you take root over of it that gives you surface diameter. So, we can define diameters in this manner surface diameter and volume diameter and then specific surface diameter is the diameter of sphere of same surface area per unit volume as a regular particle. So, this is called specific specific surface diameter. Now, we see we talked of specific surface earlier in connection with cement and we are talking we are mentioning that surface area per unit mass or per unit volume is used as specific surface. In the context of aggregate we will be talking in terms of surface area per unit volume as the specific surface. So, specific surface here we define in terms of surface area per unit volume. So, now you consider specific surface diameter it is the diameter of sphere of same surface area per unit volume as the irregular particle. So, what you got to do is you got to know a p and b p. So, that is the specific surface. Now, this must be equals to forest sphere the this is pi d square divided by volume 1 by 6 pi d cube. So, you can find that 6 by d cube I think it is there in the next it is there in the next slide. So, let us look at it you know it will be b p b p b p by a p by b p and specific surface of a sphere would be pi d square divided by 1 6 pi d cube. So, is equals to simply 6 by d. So, this d will be equals to 6 b p by a p. Now, specific surface volume diameter was what was volume diameter volume diameter volume diameter specific surface diameter volume and surface area of particle. Let us say the same derivation is available here straight away. So, 6 by d 0 is the specific surface of a sphere and specific surface of particle is this and if you equate this specific surface diameter will be 6 b p by a p 6 b p by a p. So, this is how we can find out various diameters x y or star-circuit x trafic Fermi minus y of circle psi 9 equal to 3 z to infinity square. So, this is how we have deduce that using a expression which most core originates in an integral of power of friction at the  theta. .. how we define volume diameter. Therefore, this is given by this formula, this is the specific surface diameter and this is the volume diameter right and 6 V p by A p and 6 V p by pi. So, this will be pi to the power of 1 third and 6 V p, this is 1 third, this was 1 minus 1 third. So, this will be 2 third, here also is 6 V p divided by A p. For sphere, V p is equals to 1 by 6 pi d 0 cube, A p is equals to pi d square right. So, put this values here pi d 0 square and put this value here of V p 1 by 6 pi d 0 cube, this will come 1. So, sphere is the factor, you know psi is the ratio specific surface diameter to volume diameter and is 1 for sphere. Let us see what happens if I have larger sizes, I mean more angular sizes. For angular particle, for cube of course, yes. So, if we see for cube, volume is V p is A 0 cube, A p is 6 A square and this will turn out to be 0.806 because if we go back to the formula, if we go back to the formula, you know V p by A p. So, this was A cube for the cube, 6 A cube or 6 A cube to the power 3 by 2. So, it will be 6 under root 6 V p pi to the power 1 by 3 and area is V p and V p is simply A cube, you know under root 6 A and here A will be 6 A square and if you finally, calculate out this turns out to be 0.806, ferocity factor will come out to be 806.806. For tetrahedron, this value is 0.53, you can show it similarly for tetrahedron, this value is 0.53. So, angular particle ferocity factor is 1 by psi is a reciprocal of ferocity factor. So, we define another term, this is how we can quantify shape in some manner. Angularity factor is a reciprocal of ferocity factor, right. It is a reciprocal of ferocity factor and this increases with irregularity in shape or angular shapes. This is highly angular, this is highly angular, this is still angular. So, as the angularity increases, psi reduces therefore, 1 by psi will increase. For sphere, this value is 1, for angular shape, this value is more than 1, angularity factor is more than 1, angularity factor is more than 1. This is important because more angular apes, it is packing density is poor. Means when you pack this particles together, there will be large void left in them and thus, it results in more paste that to be used in the concrete to fill in those voids. So, that is why this is important, this will be very clear as we go further. The values of angularity factor may be 1.1, values of angularity factor may be 1.1, 1.14, you know, rounded aggregate. It could be 1.1, for rounded aggregate, it could be rounded aggregate, it could be 1.1, right. So, it could be rounded, for rounded aggregate may be 1.1 and for irregular, 1.4 and cross-degregate 1.7. For cross-degregate, it is 1.7. The main important issue is the void content of aggregates linearly related to angularity factor. This is the most important issue that, you know, this is linearly related to angularity factor. And if you plot this graph, it has been observed that void content increases, void content increases with aggregate, void content increases with aggregate. And it is like this, void content increases with aggregate. So, angularity factor, angularity factor increases, means it is now more angular in shape and void content increases as the angular defector increases. So, that is why the shape is important. Now, more the voids more would be the paste required to fill in the voids and that is why the shape is very, very important in case of concrete in case of concrete and that is why you looking at shape. The size has got a roll also, we shall check that roll of the size you know size also you look into. So, sizes got a roll, sizes got a roll, spherical particles packs to higher packing density compared to irregular shapes, right. Irregular shape particle and natural aggregates are seldom spheres, they are not spheres essentially, they are seldom spheres, they are you know seldom spheres, but they can be classified as rounded irregular or crust as we have seen. Natural aggregates are not spheres. So, other all two together aggregates can be classified as rounded irregular or crust rounded irregular or crust, right. The shape can be defined in terms of angular defector that is ratio specific surface of size group to that of spheres having minimal volume diameter that is mean of sieve opening, right mean of sieve opening. Let us see what this is. So, shape as we have seen the shape and we have also observed that I mean we have just noted that shape has got an important role because packing depends upon the shape and quantifying the shape we have seen, we might be using this concept sometime later on, right. So, shape is an important as issue and angularity factor, angularity factor can be used to define quantify shapes. Higher the angularity factor more is avoid for sphere, the angularity factor is 1. Now, let us look at surface structure. The surface structure is related to degree to which particle surface are polished, dull or smooth or rough. Now, this is also important again because if it is you know it is important because surface structure the bond of the cement paste with the aggregate depends upon this surface structure, the bond of the aggregate bond of the aggregate with cement paste depends upon surface structure that is why surface structure is important, right. Now, it depends upon actually hardness of the grain and the size of the grain and porosity of parent rock. A porous rock always will have honeycomb surface structure, hard dense fine grain rocks generally have smooth fractured surface, hard dense fine grain rocks. So, it is dependent upon the rock type, it is a hard rock and fine grain generally have smooth fractured surfaces because fine grain will go away, but it is hard not many can go away. So, therefore, you are likely to have generally smooth surfaces. The classification related to this is something like this. For example, glassy is concoidal fracture, black fint is an example. Smooth is water on fracture of laminated rocks that results in water on. So, this is gravels are like that. Granular fracture with granular surface structure we are talking about that means, grains will be protruding out fracture with uniform rounded grains sand stone rough fracture of fine grain rock basalt, laminated stone etcetera and honeycomb structure, honeycomb honeycomb surface structure come from porous rock such as if you take brick for example, so visible pores and cavities will be there. So, this is surface structure an important property related to concrete. So, size shape surface structure this is important properties. So, that is what we have looked into today the size shape and surface structure that is what we looked into today. Now, packing characteristics, packing characteristics depends on both size and both depends on size and shape. This is what we will look into in the next class. Size if you have a single sized particle they will always you know create some amount of void you cannot reduce it beyond a point and the quantity amount of voids is a function of amount of voids is a function of a amount of void is a function of the packing characteristics. For example, if we consider simple cubic packing if we consider simple cubic packing then the voids here would depend upon packing, but I can assume a second kind of packing let us say and you can see depending upon the packing another particle coming here voids have reduced voids have reduced this is a two dimensional picture and you have to extend this idea to three dimension. So, packing depends governs the void contain governs the void contain and in fact, if I have a single sized particle the maximum packing that I will obtain or maximum packing density that I will obtain will define maximum density later on maximum packing density that I will obtain will depend upon the nature of packing. This is of course, for spherical particle if you take angular particle so particle all other factors remaining constant let us say void in the aggregate is a function void in the aggregate is a function of the packing characteristics. For example, this is simple cubic packing I have larger void compared to this sort of packing right. So, we have different kind of packing like body center face center etcetera etcetera we will discuss about them. So, it depends upon packing now if I want to reduce this void then if I want to reduce this void then what shall I do is I put a small aggregate here and small aggregate here and smaller aggregates can smaller size small size aggregate can reduce this void single sized particle single sized particle the amount of void the you know the amount of void reduction that as possible is limited you cannot reduce the void beyond a point it depends upon packing. Only when you have different sizes particle or at least two different size particle the void contain to reduce and you want to reduce this void further you want to reduce this void further let us say then you use may be a third finer particle. So, if you put finer particle they will go into the interstices of this particle itself this particle itself and reduce the void. So, therefore, void contents depend upon packing characteristics shape of course, is also a function but for given shape given type of packing number of particles or size distribution of the particle governs the packing characteristics. So, individual sizes we define in terms of sieves of course, we have seen but we did not talk of different sizes mixed together right. So, when you mix only when you mix different sizes together then only there is a possibility of reducing down the voids. So, we define a term called packing density packing density packing density and it is the volume of solid divided by total volume. So, it is the volume of solid divided by total volume, volume of solid by total volume. So, it is the volume fraction it is volume fraction. So, packing density is volume of solid by total volume and this packing density increases with number with a larger size distribution. Packing density increases with larger size distribution and this is what we will look into in the next class the issue of packing density how particle packs we have seen that how shape governs. So, to summarize everything today we have looked into petrographic classes we do not really did not go by any code or anything but petrographic classes are essentially the classes based on mineralogical composition their importance to rise in the fact that some of those aggregates may not be not based on their mineralogical composition of course, mineralogical composition or parent rock type governs also the shape because round rate aggregates you know it depends upon their grain structure and of course, hardness of the parent rock. So, petrographic classes are important from that point of you then we have looked into the size how do we define them, but the influence of size how it is important in concrete that you do not look into and what are the shape and texture that is what we looked into. So, the next class we will look into the you know how they are relevant shape of course, you have relevant we have already mentioned that packing would be better with rounded shape and we look into the issue of size and their relevance in concrete one important thing is it is relevant in concrete because better the packing less paste I will require. So, rounded aggregates is likely to require less paste shape is important structures you know texture is important from bond with the cement paste surface texture is important from the point of you bond with the cement paste. So, shape is important petrograph is important and size distribution is important which you will look in the next class and I think with that we can summarize this lecture. Thank you very much for being patient thanks. === Lecture 7 Transcript === Welcome to module 2 lecture 2. We shall be continuing with aggregates. If you recall last time we talked about shape and sizes of aggregate and now in this one we shall be looking into how this sizes affect the packing characteristics of aggregates. So continuing from the same place where we did last class we looked into packing characteristics due to shape how shape improves the packing and this time we will look into packing and grading fineness modulus and we shall also define a term called surface modulus. Now recall that aggregates are inert material, aggregates are inert material you know it is their inert material supposed to form the skeleton of concrete and for economy in normal concrete one would like to minimize the volume of paste in other words maximize aggregate volume fraction. Spaced contains cement and that is the costliest material in the concrete therefore one would like to minimize the use of paste from that point of view from the cost point of view of course there are other issues related to shrinkage etcetera but from shear cost point of view one would like to minimize the use of paste. So maximize the amount of aggregate in the system. Now where does paste go paste actually goes into the interstitial void space of aggregate interstitial void space in the dry aggregate system contains paste and when one puts this paste inside or mixes them together the there is an you know alteration of the space this void space in the aggregate is altered right void space in aggregate is altered when paste is introduced. So paste required to ensure dispersion of aggregates is higher than the interstitial of the aggregate and it is desirable to minimize the aggregate porosity of void content. So when you add paste into the aggregate system in fact paste goes into the interstitial of the aggregate. Now if you pat the aggregates alone you get a void content or void space which you can define in terms of porosity when you actually introduce paste and mix them together the interstitial space within the aggregate actually is changed because of the presence of paste is not same as the original porosity without the paste right and the space causes dispersion of the aggregates the separate the aggregate filling the space and separate the aggregate right. Now packing density we define as the volume of solids in unit bulk volume. So if I have total volume B and volume of solids let us say is V A s this is volume of pores then packing density will be V s divided by V this is totally is V which is equals to V s plus V P. So you can see that P if P is the porosity then V P over V is P. So V s by V is equals to 1 plus V P by V. So therefore V s by V V s by V plus plus V P by V is equals to 1 and that is actually volume of pores. So 1 minus P P is the porosity. So packing density is the volume of solid volume of solid in the whole system and it is given by 1 minus P. Packing density of single size particles is equal to 1 minus P. So the volume of the pore is equal to 1 minus P. So packing density is the volume of solid volume of solid in the whole system and it is given by 1 minus P it is given by 1 minus P. Packing density of single size particle is relatively low and depends on packing arrangement. Packing density of single size particles is relatively low and you can see that we can understand that very simply we can understand that very simply this will be because supposing I have got all single size particle and they are packed like this. So this is called simple cubic packing and you can consider in the other direction also other direction the same packing you know other direction three dimensional same sort of packing right. Just one below the other this is called simple cubic packing then the void content I can find out I can find out the void content or porosity because two particles all particles are touching each other. So therefore if I find out this volume so volume of solid will be this and total volume will be. So if the diameter of the particle is d, d cube will be my total v and v s will be equals to pi d cube by 6. So if I have so porosity would be, so porosity would be if d cube, so porosity would be given by porosity are given by porosity will be given by 1 minus v s by v, that is equals to P and this by V that is equals to P and this will be given as 1 minus pi d cube by 6 by d cube. So, which will be simply 1 minus pi by 6 and this will be somewhere close to 0.48. So, for simple cubic packing the porosity is simply 48 percent. So, for a single size particle porosity is fixed and depends upon type of packing. Packing density of simple cubic body centered cubic and face centered cubic arrangements are 0.5, 2.68 and 0.74. So, simple cubic packing so I like this each particle is just by the side of it and we have seen the P is equals to 0.48. Hence, packing density is packing density is 0.52. Now, consider this kind of arrangement, let us say another arrangement where this particles are sitting inside. Let me erase the previous one out. Let me erase the previous one out and just see supposing that my packing is now like this, this, this, this and the next layer it is coming in between. So, actually packing density would change now the void should be relatively less, void should be relatively less and you can show that for this arrangement packing density will be higher than 0.52. So, depending upon type of packing for example, for face centered cubic arrangement and body centered cubic arrangement, you know body centered cubic arrangement it is like this face centered cubic arrangement it is 0.74. So, it depends upon the cap packing and independent of the size because if you recall the size d cube got cancelled therefore, it is independent of the size and depends upon the packing characteristics. While actual packing density of single size sphere will lie somewhere in between I mean it will lie between this two. You can have best packing or the worst packing random packing can have something anywhere in between. That is why if you recall we define you know we define something like for rounded aggregate the packing density was defined defined as 0.67 when you try to you know in relation to when we are talking of shape. So, to define shape we used angularity you know some angularity index we used where we use the packing density as 0.67. However, multi size mixtures have higher packing density thus to have higher packing density aggregates of different sides are used. How is it let us first look at it simply supposing supposing this is my particles and they are packed let us say again simple cubic packing. Now, let me put now let me put another aggregate let me put another aggregate finer in between in that case packing density of the aggregate will be reduced in that case packing density of the aggregate will be reduced and let me then put still another aggregate somewhere there still finer you know I can put still finer one right still finer one I can put in very fine I can put in still finer one somewhere there somewhere there you know somewhere there. So, you can see if I use more than one size multi size mixtures have higher packing density now the solids are more the wards have become less thus to have higher packing density aggregate of different sizes are used. So, you do not use single size aggregate essentially because single size aggregate will always packed to a low packing density or high porosity when you use more than one size packing density is improved and thereby, wards space or porosity is reduced hence your paste content will be less not only that proportions of different size fraction shall be appropriate for maximization of packing density. So, size ratio and one thing is size ratio and one thing is size ratio size ratio is size ratio this is an important issue and proportions are important issue size ratio means maximum size let us say is 75 my minimum size let us say 75 micron then next size let us say is x. So, one size is x next size is y ratio of this y by x this is size ratio and we said that this quotient generally we use as 2. So, this size ratio is important it is 2 is good enough but if it is one let us say then it is with the same size. So, it is not going to have any effect so size ratio as some effect 2 is good enough and that is why you use the quotient size quotient to define the sizes as 2 recall that we are talking about the square shape size and the ratio of sizes we actually size quotient to use as 2 we use 2. So, size ratio is important proportion is also important it is very important have the proportions you know. So, proportions could make it you know the maximization of the packing density is possible depending upon the proportions of each size fraction proportions of each size fraction. Now, this can be explained very easily considering a binary mixture let us see you know how packing density with addition of another size material you can understand this much easily. Obviously, the degree of improvement depends upon size ratio I have already mentioned and let us look into how does it improve packing of binary system is very easy to understand. Let us say I have 2 aggregates a and b right let us say b is a core size a is finer and we are assuming spherical for simplicity we are considering each factor independently first we looked into shape and we said that rounded shape packs better the void ratio increases with you know going from rounded to angular shape. So, therefore, spherical one packs better and we are just now considering the effect of different sizes and their proportions on the packing density. So, we are considering spherical particle again do not not changing the shape. So, it will be something like this supposing you have got all fine materials this is let us say is a and a and this is b. So, if you add small amount of b to a if you add small amount of b to a right this is a and this is b total volume will increase by this quantity total volume will increase I have just put them inside and I can find out how the void ratio change what is void ratio volume of voids divided by volume of solid or volume of pores divided by volume of solid. So, we define void ratio as volume of pores divided by volume of solid and which is b minus b is the total volume. So, b minus divided by v s so v by v s. So, you can write void ratio as b divided by volume of solid minus 1 right. So, this is what you can write for void ratio and let us say how it would change. Now, void ratio of a alone will be volume of overall volume it you know it is it is it is let us say a feels the total volume alone divided by volume of solids of a minus 1 because we have defined the void ratio earlier by this equation void ratio we have defined by this equation b by v s minus 1 this is the total volume the volume of solid minus 1. So, that is the void ratio so void ratio of a alone void ratio of a alone will be b divided by v s a that is the solid volume in total b minus 1 right. So, v a v s a are overall volume and solid volume of a in the system void ratio of b is b divided by v b v s b minus 1 that means, if I feel in the whole system with b alone then the volume of solid that would occupy is given by this. Now, just look at so this was the thing just consider a small amount of b is added to find a this is my a and I have just added small amount of b packing of finds remain the remaining undisturbed total volume is sum of bulk volume of a and solid volume of b. Supposing I just add you know this is just added this right so total volume will I just added this let us say when I mix it properly we are assuming that this volume packing of this one will not be disturbed largely packing of finds remaining undisturbed I just add from top total volume of sum of bulk volume of a and solid volume of b so total volume will be this bulk volume of a plus arm o a to the becomes adds volume of a plus solid volume of b sum of a plus problem o b to the force so total volume of B. So, total volume is the sum of bulk volume of A plus the solid volume of B and volume of solid is the solid volume of A plus solid volume of B. So, using this if I use this algebra to find out the void ratio volume fraction of B in total solid of course, will be B B divided by B A plus B B right. Let me call define this is a variable X. So, if X is the variable B B by B A plus B B. So, that X is the volume fraction of B in total solid B A B B are solid volume of A and B as we have understood. Then E X that is the void as a function of this can be written as V plus B B. Now, what is this V plus B B? V was the original volume. So, this is V this volume is V plus the V B that is the volume of total volume increase in total volume. So, this is a new total volume because we said volume of total volume will be the increase in you know to volume of A volume of bulk volume of A plus the solid volume of B. So, this is the total volume this total volume and this is a solid volume because volume of solid of A plus volume. So, if I add if I add a small quantity of coarse aggregate, quartz size fraction aggregate to bulk finer size aggregate. Then what you to do? It will increase the bulk volume by the amount that I have added the solid volume that I have added. For example, B B B B is a solid volume of the coarse aggregate B I have added and V was the total volume that is volume of solid plus volume of force of A. So, if I add this it will just increase the total volume without increasing the pores. Let us say without disturbing the porosity of the fine aggregate in that case the volume of total volume will be V plus V B and volume of solid will be this. So, my void ratio by definition would be B plus V plus V B V S A plus B V S A plus B B because we said in the V volume V S A is the amount of solid minus 1. And I can write it like this V by V S A. If I can write it like this V by 2 component I am separating out because V can be written as V S A plus V B. So, I can write it out like this V you know multiply both side by this term V by V S A plus V V can be written as V by V S A multiplied by V S A by V S A plus V V. So, what is this actually this is the total volume divided by volume of solid and this is packing density you know packing density of the whole thing. So, anyway I have just separated out so that I can take you know take something common. So, let us see how it how the algebra works let us just see how the algebra works. So, this is what I have done modified this term this divided by this term and the next would be V by V S A this term remains same and this I can write as 1 minus V S B because V S A is equals to 1 minus V S B divided by V S A plus V V all right. So, 1 minus V S A so that is what I can write you know I can write V 1 minus V S A plus V V because V S A is nothing but V S A plus V S B is equals to 1 that is what we are assuming total volume right V is the this volume and total volume is 1. So, volume fraction this is volume fraction in the final mix is this. So, I am writing it like this and if I define x what was I x x definition of x was V S B divided by V S A total volume V V. So, this was the this you know is the total volume that is fraction of solid volume of B in the total volume that is what we defined as x. So, this will be this is this is this is actually this is this is this is this is x and this is also x because by definition and minus 1. So, I can write as V by V S A 1 minus x plus x minus 1 and I can take it take common 1 minus x I can take common. So, if I take 1 minus x common I will get V by V S A minus 1. So, this is by definition E A. So, this is by definition the voids ratio of A alone void ratio of A alone this is by definition void ratio of A alone. Let me repeat this process what I have done I have added some coarse aggregate into the fine system. If I just add a few of them and maybe push it a little bit from the top little bit small amount it is unlikely to disturb the packing characteristics of fine aggregate too much because fine aggregate quantity is very large only a small quantity 1 or 2 pieces let us say I have added of the coarse aggregate B. So, it will not disturb the overall packing of the fine aggregate minimal disturbance ideal case it is actually really it does not happen that way, but ideal case let us assume. So, in that case total volume will now increase because I have added some material and that will heap up or increase the total volume by how much by the solid volume of the coarse aggregate that I have added. Solid volume will also increase by the same amount. So, I can express the void ratio that is the original volume plus the volume of the solid and let us we are in our algebraic expression we are assuming V as the original volume. So, V plus V B that is I have added volume solid I have added divided by VSA plus VB is the total volume minus 1 is a porosity by definition. Then I am doing a little bit of algebraic manipulation small algebraic manipulation what is that manipulation V by you know I just write take this term out and write it in this manner multiplied to open bottom by VSA and this term I keep it as it is the volume of the solid BV is the because this is the amount I have added BV is the amount I have added solid I have added in the overall system. So, V SB divided by VSA plus VB because there is no other solid volume. So, VB is nothing but B SB I have just written it like this this I could have written B SB as well all same thing because VB is same as B SB. So, I have just written it like this now this V this VSA is 1 minus B SB because my total volume is 1 total volume is 1 and V is the original volume. So, this is original volume and total volume is 1. So, I am just writing it separately in this manner because original volume V and this original volume I am using to define the VSA in the same total volume original volume V the E A will be defined as VSA divided by V if alone it was packed you know VSA divided by V minus 1. So, if alone it was packed if it was packed alone then the volume that it occupied. So, that is how this is nothing but E A so E A into 1 minus X. So, that is how we come across that is it will reduce linearly as I increase the volume fraction of B. So, from the previous one what we have seen is when we add a small volume of coarse fraction you know aggregate coarse aggregate the word ratio reduces reduces linearly with the original volume. So, this is the original volume of X which is nothing but volume of total volume you know. So, proportion it reduces with the proportion of solid volume of V it reduces because the expression is if you recall the expression was E A void ratio reduces 1 minus X and X by definition X by definition is VSA divided by VS plus VB you know by definition X was something like this we have define X S we have define X S VB divided by V A or I can say VS V divided by VSA plus VS V so, that is how I define the volume fraction of coarse solid in the total volume. So, that is what it is so we see that it reduces linearly it reduces linearly. Now, let us look it from another angle consider small amount of fine aggregate A fine aggregate A you know added to coarse aggregate B coarse aggregate B this should be B packing of B remaining undisturbed bulk volume of B is the total volume of solid you know total bulk volume of B is the total volume for solid volume of A and B. Let us just see the diagram will make this statement very clear what we are trying to say is supposing I have got now all large particle B and I am trying to adding a small amount of fine particles. So, they will simply go into the interstitious of the coarse aggregate particle they will simply go into the interstitious occupy this space simply they will go into the space this volume is my V original volume B of the B of the you know which was packed with coarse particle. So, this packing of this one will not get disturbed because I have put in a few particles it is not going to disturb this no way it is going to disturb. So, it will remain same right packing of B will remain same packing of B will remain same A will you know particle A will all go inside. So, what will happen to the total solid volume total volume remain same. So, total volume bulk volume total bulk volume will remain same previous case bulk volume increased but here bulk volume will remain same bulk volume will remain same volume of solid will increase volume of solid volume of solid will be equals to B S B which was there originally or B B whatever you call it plus volume of solid that you have added right now this to volume. So, this solid volume will increase by this quantity that you have added. So, therefore, you know E X that is the porosity of a bird ratio as a function V is the bulk volume is remain same this was the volume of the solid that you have you know the original volume of the solid and the volume of aggregate that you have added original volume remains same minus 1 because we know we remember this was V S minus 1. So, V S S just increased by this small amount of A that you have added minus 1 again I do a little bit of algebraic manipulation and what I do B can be separated out as B can be we can be separated out as you know it is I mean just multiplied by top and bottom by B S B both sides. So, I just multiply by this B S B B S B no separation here simply multiply this by because I want to get X and this is my X this is my X. So, I want to get X so what I have done I just multiplied by this. So, this gives me B by B S B X minus 1 right. So, E X is equals to B by B S B X minus 1 and then what I do is I just add minus X and plus X. So, I just you know in just to little bit more algebraic manipulation this I add minus X add X subtract X and if I do then this X gets common. So, I will have B by B S B minus 1 because this is what I want to get which is nothing but the E B word ratio of B alone. So, I wanted to get word ratio of B alone and for that I must subtract X out of this. So, X if I take common I get like this and this is X minus 1. So, what I get is E B X plus X minus 1 E B X plus X minus 1 or I can write that X into 1 plus C B minus 1 that is the again linearly related to X linearly related to X as my X increases as my you know X as my X increases I sorry X reduces here X will be reducing because X is a proportion of coarse aggregate in the system. So, as my X reduces we will find that this word ratio smaller the X word ratio reduce. So, if you two things we have observed from our discussion so far physically you can understand when you add small amount of fine aggregate into a otherwise packed system of coarse aggregate the fine aggregate will simply occupy the interstitial space within the coarse aggregate thereby reduce the void volume that sort is manifested in the void ratio. It so happens that void ratio reduces linearly you know algebraically you can show that void ratio will reduce linearly. Similarly, when you add in a packed system of fine spherical particle I will say or aggregate some large coarse particle very small quantity it will again reduce down the void in the system because you will add only some solids total volume will increase solid volume will also increase void volume remaining same as the original that was the void volume in the fines the now void you know void quantity remaining same that was there in the original fines. So, void ratio or porosity will reduce because volume of voids in the total volume has reduced. This we can draw in a manner like as a function of X for example void ratio and this is my X actually the X is increasing along this direction X is increasing along this direction because we said B fraction is 1 volume of B this fraction and this is 0 here. So, X is 0 here and 1 here the you know the proportion we are saying that X is nothing but volume of coarse aggregate in the total volume. So, here it is 1 that is all coarse aggregate and here it is all fine aggregate and in between I will have different values of X. So, E S stands for the void ratio of A alone. So, when I have only A this is the void ratio of A when I add B a little bit of B void ratio reduces down and similarly here it is E B initially and as I add a little bit of A in other words reduce down the volume of B the void ratio should reduce in this manner linearly with X. So, this is my X it reduces from 1 to smaller value E B reduces that is what we seen through those equation. This is what happens if I add a very small quantity and if the same thing was happening then ideally I should have a minimum void somewhere there at some proportion but in reality what happens is actually get a curve like this if you calculate out the void ratio experimentally try to determine them at different proportion of two binary mixtures, two mixtures only two sizes you have taken spherical particle let us say marble balls playing marbles or small balls you have taken then you will get this sort of a relationship of void ratio versus volume fraction. This occurs because of our you know our assumption was that the packing characteristics of the fine aggregate will not be disturbed if I add coarse aggregate no new force will be created. Similarly when we added fine aggregate to coarse system it will simply reduce down the voids going into the interstaces of the coarse aggregate that is what we assume but in reality what happens is for a small amount this may remain valid you can imagine that for example if you have a box containing large size spherical balls you put few more small balls they will just so go trickle down and sit somewhere inside. But when you start putting more and more a time will come when this particle will push the larger particle away in other words it will disturb the packing of the larger particle not only that the themselves they are packing will not be there ideal packing which they were actually having when they are packed alone for example fine aggregate if you pack alone you get a kind of packing you get a voids but if you put this same fine aggregate in a coarse system interstices of a coarse system the void content will not be same as that rather it will increase. So because of this kind of behavior that packing get disturbed what you call particle interference when you put another particle it will interfere with the original system and thus how the curve never remains straight line rather it goes as a you know it becomes carbulinear rather it tends to become carbulinear in this direction and the void ratio is much higher than what you would have got for an ideal case. But one thing interesting is by and large at this point you will have minimum near this point you will have the minimum packing. So minimum packing will be very close to what you would have found out even in case of ideal case. So the but the point important point here is there is a specific proportion of this volume volume of you know proportion of B and A where this will be minimum that means it is not independent of the proportion the minimum maximum minimum void content is a function of the proportion of B in A or otherwise you can say proportion of A in B. Thus E x can be represented in a two lines intersecting at x star that is what we just said we are just shown x star you know x star is the intersection point this is my x star right x star and you can calculate out this x star algebraically because from this side if I calculate out from this side if I calculate out it is given as x star 1 plus E b minus 1 that must be equals to E A 1 minus x star because x is same for both and just simply from this you can calculate out eliminate out you know I mean you can get an expression for x x star you bring it this side and E b and this side you have got x star E A. So if you with a negative sign so if you bring it to the other side coefficient of x will be 1 plus E A plus E B and this term is independent of x star so it goes to the other side so you will have E A plus 1 divided by this. So x star can be algebraically evaluated as this and that is the optimal proportion at which void ratio will be minimum in other words packing density will be maximum packing density will be maximum packing density will be maximum actual behavior is represented by the curve due to particle interference this is represented by curve because of particle interference but the point I am trying to make the point that I am trying to make is that proportion is important size ratio is important and obviously you should have more than one size. So you take two sizes packing density improves that is void ratio reduce but the amount of reduction of the void ratio depends upon the proportion so proportion is important obviously size ratio is also important and shape we have seen earlier. Now there are two effects which are recognized one is called wall effect for example if you see this is my coarse aggregate if you see this is my coarse aggregate this is the coarse aggregate and this is the fine aggregate the packing here is unlikely to be very good you know it is not packing like bulk packing because in in front of a large surface or large surface this packing is never good this we call as wall effect and it is recognized everywhere. So this dotted line in the boundary where the wall effect actually increases the pores. So you can see the packing of the fine particle finer particle here we have not taken spherical but we are showing some sort of regular particle packing of the fine particle itself got getting disturbed because of presence of the coarse aggregate coarse particle. So quartz particle causing a disturbance this is called wall effect and this particle inside will be pushing the particle out. So it is fear of this particle is something like that and if the words otherwise were smaller now this particle depending upon its size it will push out so this is called loosening effect. So wall effect and loosening effect these are the part of the particle interference and due to this packing density of the both quartz and the finer one gets disturbed. So loosening effects cause disturbances in the packing characteristics or void content in the quartz or particle while wall effect cause increase and cause an increase in the void content of the fine particle which has gone inside the quartz particle. So that is this two effect causes the carburelene here behavior. So you can see that both together is causing you know both together is causing wall effect and loosening effect in a large aggregate this is your aggregate to use the fine aggregate this is the additional quartz which have come in additional because of you know additional quartz that is coming so particle interference is occurring here etcetera. If I calculate packing density of the binary mixture dp let me call it as packing density and I have defined it like this which is 1 minus p which is 1 minus p then e x is v divided by v s minus 1. So this is nothing but the 1 by packing density so dp x minus 1 in other words I can write 1 by dp x is equals to 1 plus e x right and this graph will now look like this if I plot with x e x is known to it so packing density if I try to plot with x because e x is known you know if I try to plot it with x equation where x were available this is for 1 minus x e a into 1 minus x if you recall and from this side it will be again e x expression so available and this will give me something like non-linear curve of this kind and from this side also again if I plot at same x star you will have maximum packing density. So initially packing density increases with addition of second size but increases less after due to some particle interference and you can see that something like this will occur following this form of a curve. So this would have been the ideal case but real case is something like this because of the particle interference ideal case would have been something like this following this equation decide the real case is somewhat different ideal case ideal case coming from this side real case will be something like this. So packing density packing density is something of this kind as x increases does a peak the peak of course remains same at x star which we have evaluated. So idea of this binary mixture is that if you make mixed two proper two particles packing density increases not ideally but in some manner right but it increases and it has got a maximum at some proportion of the quartz fraction in the total or some proportion of you know which is same as fine. Now I can extend this idea of this binary mixtures to ternary, quaternary and so on so on so forth. So idea of this can be extended to multinary mixtures as well to show that packing density improves with each subsequent addition of sizes. So you add two two two size you add the third size with appropriate size ratio of packing density will improve add a fourth size and packing density will increase further fifth size packing density will increase further and so on. So as many sizes you add packing density increases therefore we do not use single size particle in concrete aggregate system we use large number of sizes varying from smaller size of 75 micron because we cannot use seal ten clay they have other problems we will discuss that sometime later on. So sand size which are largely inert do not hold on to particles very close to the surface because surface forces are not so dominant in sand in silk somewhat cement particles might get stick to it etcetera etcetera there are problems which we will discuss but sand is inert they do not stick to each other neither do will cause any kind of problem. So you sand which is 75 micron and above to as many large sizes possible maximum size possible the use of maximum sizes other effect of course but positive effect is it will improve the packing density other negative effect we will consider later on. So optimal fraction also we can identify you can identify also the optimal fraction and therefore to ensure dispersion and to take care of particle interference amount of mortar used in the aggregate system is little more than the voids corresponding to maximum packing density in the course aggregate for normal concrete practical grading cups are proposed in the code to ensure appropriate range of size fraction in overall aggregate system. So what we do is the grading system is nothing it tells us what proportion of what size one should use with the current concepts of packing density perhaps one can determine this algebraically knowing certain properties of the aggregates but earlier when such concepts of particle packing so not so well developed people suggested grading which actually states how much proportion of which particle should be used in your mix actually graded graded graded ranges were suggested from experience so that minimum proportion of a particular size and the maximum proportion of a particular size in a mix have been specified and this are given in code. Of course we have taken care of the aspect of particle packing etcetera simply from experience or empirical observation for best result amount of mortar should be slightly more because particle interference will be there therefore amount of mortar in the aggregate should be slightly more than the void content in the course aggregate and it should be slightly mortar should be slightly more in the system and in the mortar sand if you look at the packing characteristics of sand paste should be slightly more than that in the sand itself. This concept will still use when we look into fresh concrete so lowest size we say 75 micron because that is the sand size thus increasing nominal maximum size of aggregate implies increasing number of size by 1. So if you are using maximum size as 20 mm and now you decide to use 40 mm it means that you have added one more size which means my packing density will increase and I can use less paste right. So addition of one more size is very important and therefore overall boards in the aggregate reduce by increasing MSA. So this we have understood now and the paste required will be less. So increase MSA or maximum size of aggregate your paste required will be less. The grading requirement in the table is for all aggregates separate grading requires are also given in code. So you see this is why the code gives you table table are from suggestion of grading the grading requirements are suggested that gives you the range of the range of the sizes that should be present in an overall aggregate system. For fine aggregates of course we define grading zones depending upon in of course in Indian code as well as in BS code the grading zones are defined for finest zone is a zone 4 and zone 1 is the coarsest because fine aggregate themselves quite often they may be natural sand reverse end. So they have their grading there are different proportions of sizes and according to the sizes generally prevails for grades grading zones have been actually specified or defined and zone fine is the most fine zone 1 is a coarsest. Then we define something called fineness modulus it is another common way of defining size of fine aggregate or even total aggregate you know you talk in terms of a never edge size we will just look into this. This is typical grading requirements you know. So if you have a sieves designations are given if it is a 20 mm aggregate if it is a 20 mm aggregate MSF 40 mm then 100 percent must be passing through this 95 to 100 percent you know grading requirement given in code. So this is the grading requirement given in code a table are form. So it says that your if it is a 40 mm MSF best result you will get when 40 mm 80 mm through 100 percent should pass through 80 mm in 40 mm 90 to 100 and 200 percent should 20 mm 100 percent should pass through it etcetera etcetera. So for 40 mm MSF this is the grading requirement for 20 mm MSF this is the grading requirement. So such grading requirement in terms of the range of sizes are given in code and that should be used in order to that should be used in order to satisfy the best to get the you know best possible packing. This were actually determined empirically this were actually determined empirically right from experience people have actually suggested. But as I said modern concepts of particle packing are also available. Let us look at typical grading curve. Well I think I must be having a typical grading curve just let me have a look at typical grading curve if I have one may not have right now. So we will sit in the next class maybe we have a typical grading curve typical grading curve it looks something like this you know they look something like this percentage passing sorry ship size size on this side percentage passing. So if you have 100 percent 20 mm 40 mm MSF let us say 100 percent passing something like this etcetera etcetera. So these are typical you know grading curve are plotted like this I must be having somewhere I will just come to that sometime later on right. So now what we have discussed so far is we have looked into the effect of sizes proportions of different sizes particle packing etcetera etcetera. We will just look into fineness modulus one more concept we will start this and continue with this in the next class together with the surface modulus which I mentioned. So fineness modulus you see if since size varies logarithmically since sizes varies logarithmically since sizes varies logarithmically weighted average can be obtained as P i log d size I cannot take average size. So I take weighted average size this is the proportion of total aggregate so I talk in terms of P i divided by sigma P i log d i log d i this is the weightage function. So log of diameter so this is what one can use right. So average if I want to calculate I should use here weighted average one could have possibly averaged it in in form of you know geometric mean in fact that is what we are trying to do. So weighted average or geometric mean you can look into and that is what we are trying to do and instead you know so average we get the average sieve number. So this fineness modulus concept I will define I mean I will explain in the next class because this would take a little bit of time and we define fineness modulus as the weighted average sieve number it is the fineness modulus gives us weighted average sieve number right. What we do is we give the sieve number this size is 0 than 1 sieve number 2 3 4 etcetera etcetera and this numbers are you know this numbers if I want to find out average weighted average sieve number then the weighting functions are nothing but P 1 P 2 P 3 where P 1 P 2 P 3 are nothing but the proportions of that size aggregate in the total aggregate proportion of that size aggregate in the total aggregate. So this concept we will discuss in the next class in the beginning and we will discuss one more concept one more concepts called surface modulus one more concepts called surface modulus and surface modulus is in terms of specific surface. So specific surface can be related to what is called surface modulus and this concept is for a sphere we know the specific surface is 6 by dp here we are defining the specific surface as the surface area divided by volume of surface area per unit volume. So specific surface for each particle can be defined and then we can define the surface modulus again in terms of a kind of weighted function and we will look into this in the next class. So therefore we can summarize today's discussion in terms of what we have discussed is essentially packing fineness modulus and surface modulus we have just started and next class we will look into this and that is what it is. While we are looking at packing we have seen the principles of the packing density how it changes in a binary mixtures and extended this idea one can extend this idea to tarnary mixtures. We have also discussed concepts like we have also discussed concepts like loosening effect and wall effect which leads to particle interference. Thank you very much. . === Lecture 8 Transcript === Welcome to module 2. Lecture 3. We will continue from where we have finished in the last class that is in the last class we talked about fineness modulus at the end and surface modulus we will define today. In addition to this we will look into properties of aggregate namely strength toughness, hardness, specific gravity, bulk density, porosity, etcetera, thermal properties and impurities. And lastly we will look into aggregate blending. So, let us look into fineness modulus. If you recall yesterday last class we are talking about average size you know description of aggregates how do you describe. One way is the grading that we have mentioned in which you talk of proportion of aggregate in each size group which we represent by square cives. So, proportion in each size group that is what one of the ways of representing the aggregate size distribution. C 1 or through 7 analysis we determine that and another way of single through a single parameter describing the aggregates is in terms of what is known as fineness modulus. Similarly, surface modulus is another characteristics. So, fineness modulus let us look at it first you know first of all average size cannot be expressed by arithmetic mean. So, you cannot size you cannot express it by arithmetic mean because size is varies logarithmically size varies sizes vary logarithmically right. Seap sizes vary logarithmically in other words it actually varies in geometric proportion like minimum sizes let us say 0.075 mm. Next sizes double of it 150.15 mm or 150 micron then would be 300 micron or 0.3 millimeter and so on. So, you can see that this is 2 into 0.075 this is 2 into 2 into 0.075. So, it varies in geometrical proportion geometrical progression it varies in geometrical progression. So, if you take you know if you take log log of the sizes log d let us say d 0 let me call this as d 0 this is d 0 log d 0 this will be log d 0 this will be log of 2 d 0 and this will be log of 4 d 0. So, there is a you know in log scale they will vary in arithmetic progression because every time you are increasing log d 0 plus log 2. So, this can be written as log d 0 plus log 2 this will be written as log d 0 plus 2 log 2 and so on. So, it varies in arithmetic progression in logarithmic scale right. So, sizes varies it is in geometrical progression and therefore, it varies logarithmically. So, when we talk of size when we talk of average size we do not talk of average particle size, but what we talk of is average sieve number and fineness modulus actually represents average sieve number, average sieve number. What we can do is we can define we can define sieve numbers as for example, 0 sieve number sieve number 1, sieve number 2 etcetera etcetera. So, this may corresponds to 0.075 mm this may corresponds to 150 mm sieve number. So, this is sieve number this is you know sieve number sieve number 0 1 2 300 0.1 0.300 mm sieve number 2 etcetera etcetera. So, this is you know I can talk in terms of average sieve number. So, if it is 3 you know average value is 3.5 which would mean that the average sieve number is 3.5. So, that is what we do weighted average. So, we find out average sieve number and fineness modulus represents actually average sieve number. So, we find out weighted average as proportions of particles as proportions of particles in a given size are not same. You know for example, proportion in sieve number 0, proportion in sieve number 1, proportion in sieve number 2 or sizes corresponding sieve size I mean particle size 0, size number 0, size number 1, size number 2, proportions will not be same. So, therefore, if they are same then my average would always be for example, if there are 5 sieves 4, 5 average would have been simply some total of all of this divided by 5. But actually proportions on this ones are not same. Therefore, we talk in terms of weighted average. So, if we know P 0, P 1, P 2, P 3 etcetera as the fractions of particles in 75, 150, 300, 600, micron sizes etcetera, then they can be used as weights for weighted average. So, P 0 is the proportion. So, P 0 into 0 plus P 1 into 1 plus P 2 into 2 etcetera etcetera P 3 into 3 and so on. I can sum this up and this sum would nothing but the weighted average because this is a fraction of the mass in corresponding to 0 size the 0 number size, corresponding to first size, second size. So, 0 size 1 size 2 size 3 etcetera, etcetera since this is a fraction of the total mass fraction. Therefore, there are represents weighted average. So, they are used as weights for weighted average right, they are fraction. So, sum total of P 0, P 1, P 2, P 3, P 3, sigma P i is equals to 1. Sigma P i is equals to 1. Therefore, this represents nothing but weighted average, Siv number. Weighted average Siv number, if I start my numbering from 75 micron or 0.075 millimeter itself. So, fineness modulus is that. So, fineness modulus since size varies logarithmically, logarithm is typically weighted average can be obtained as sigma of the whole thing actually there is a bracket here. So, you can call it sigma P i log d i divided by sigma P i that is what it is. Now, sum of this that means varying for i varying from 0 to n maybe. So, first one will be P 0, proportion not proportion log d i log d i the mass this could be even mass. You can talk in terms of even mass instead of P if I talk of mi, mi this will also do because mi divided by sigma mi, m 0 divided by sigma, m sigma mi, m 0 divided by sigma mi is equals to P 0. So, this could be m, but otherwise one can have sigma P i also is correct there is no problem because this is will be always equals to 1. So, this is the weighted average, this is the weighted average. So, we can find it out in this manner. So, average Siv number can be written as 0 P 0 1 P 1 2 P 2 3 P 3 and there the mass fraction of particles in 7550 etcetera, etcetera. This is fineness modulus, this is called fineness modulus. And if you look at this this can be written as cumulative percentage retained divided by 100. Sum of all the cumulative percentage retains, sum of cumulative percentage retained in all the sieves divided by 100. This is percentage thus fineness modulus represents weighted average Siv number, average Siv number in which your particle belongs. Let us see how it is cumulative. For single size particle fineness modulus of i h size will be simply Siv number itself. So, because there is single size particle. So, this value is 1, fraction is 1. So, it is the Siv number itself. So, 75 micron f m is equals to 0 for 150 micron f m is equals to 1, single size particle and so on. And from this so 0 for all particles being you know I can write it in terms of a, b log 075. And as I said logarithm of the size, sieve size or level of the size of you know average sieve size is arithmetic is in arithmetic progression. So, this increases simply by log 2, b log 2. Therefore, I can derive an expression for fineness modulus. For a single particle size for 75 micron size this is the fineness modulus is 0. For 150 micron sieve fineness modulus you know particles all particles belong on to 150 micron fineness modulus is 1. And from this actually I can derive out a and b, a comes out b comes out to be 3.32 and a comes out to be 3.73. So, starting from 75 micron size f m is given as 3.73 into 3.2 because b is 3.232, 3.32 log d i. d i is a nominal sieve size in millimeter. For any size you can find out fineness modulus like this. And for combination fineness modulus is given by this formula as we have seen for mixed you know number of particles there are some particles in 75 micron. So, for solitude we can write it like this 1 p 1 2 p 2 these are the proportions and n p n. Now, this if I break it up I can write it 0 p 0 plus 1 p 1 plus 1 p 2 1 p 3 etcetera. The second term would be 1 p 2 because there is a 2 here and rest all this 0 is does not matter this is only 1 this appears twice. So, I can write it is 1 p 2 plus 1 p 3 etcetera. And next series will start from 1 into p 3 to 1 into p n and last term will be p n. Now, what is this? What is this? This is the proportion of all the particle right. So, particle retain in bottom most size particles, particles retained in smaller size that is 75 micron. This is particle retained in this is particle retained in not 75 150 micron this is particle retained in this is particle retained in not 75 150 micron. This is retained in 300 microns because it starts from p 2. So, 75 150 this is particle retained in 300 and this particle retained in that top most c. So, therefore, this is the summation of particle retained in the bottom most shift to bottom most shift to you know the top most shift. So, this is nothing, but cumulative percentage retained in all the cumulative percentage retained in all the shift. So, number 1 plus cumulative retained in shift 2 cumulative retained in shift 3 cumulative n. So, this is the sum total of you know not cumulative percentage retained in shift 1 percentage retained in shift 3 not. So, all retained in all the shifts this is retained in nth shift this is in the n minus 1 etcetera etcetera. So, first one is percentage cumulative retained on shift number 1 bottom most to cumulative retained to everything. So, therefore, this is nothing, but sum total of cumulative percentage retained in all the shifts that cumulative percentage divided by 100 because this is where in percentage that will give you the finalist modulus. So, from the definition finalist modulus can be derived in this manner. We calculate out finalist modulus on the basis of cumulative percentage retained on all the shifts divided by first sieveutic how much is the percentage cumulative percentage retained. Then you find out what is the cumulative percentage retained on the second sieve, third sieve, fourth sieve. So, cumulative percentage from top you can start. You start on the top it is the last top sieve only where cumulative you know the percentage retained that will form the cumulative. If you go to the next sieve then that that retained in top slip, sieve and the next sieve this to sum is the cumulative percentage retained. You go to the third next bottom one. So, it will be the top next and next the sum total of all the particles retained in the top three sieves that will form the cumulative percentage retained. In this manner you calculate out cumulative percentage retained in all the sieves sum them up divided by 100 that gives you finalist modulus. Actually it represents average sieve size of the particle you know average size of the sieve size not size average size of the particle. And you want to find out corresponding average size you can find out using the formula that I have given you that must be equals to that must be equals to a plus b into log of log of d i. I mean log of you know log of d 0. So, you can find out what is the log of d i. So, what you can find out what is the d i value what is the average size value you can get some idea. So, what we really use this size what we use is the sieve average sieve number that is the finalist modulus right to represent because it is essentially used for comparing to aggregates which is finer one is finer another is less fine right. And this is used in mixed design some of the mixed designs because you can designate a particular graded aggregate according to their finalist modulus. Similarly, there is another one called surface modulus another index called surface modulus specific surface can be related to surface modulus. Specific surface of a sphere is for you know or if you write it pi d square is a surface area divided by 1 by 6 pi d cube. So, this will be simply 6 by d for a i th particle size is 6 by d i. So, specific surface for sphere you can find out in this manner specific surface is surface area per unit volume for two sieve sizes d i and d i minus 1. I can talk in terms of average sieve size geometric mean. So, geometric mean is a root over of this two. So, for two sieve sizes d i and d i a specific surface is 6 of the geometric mean size and that is given by this. Since d i plus i minus 1 is there d i plus 1 is 2 d i which is equals to 4 d i minus 1. So, d i plus 1 is equals to 2 d i equals to 4 d i minus 1. So, as the sieve size increases as the sieve is increases as the sieve size increases as the sieve size increases. What will happen to the specific surface as sieve size increases the specific surface as the sieve size increases. Specific surface will reduce by a factor of 2 right because it is simply proportional to 6 over inversely proportional to d i. So, if you have higher these size specific surface will reduce by a factor of 2. So, considering contribution of size fraction all size fraction I can write it therefore, surface modulus as this is the size fraction of the bottom most see that is retained in 75 micron passing through 150 and this is the p 1 p 2 p 3. So, size contribution will be proportional to. So, if I write this multiplied by d you know the smaller size d 0 that will be the that would be that would give me the total some approximate value of surface specific surface of the aggregate. So, that is how surface modulus is defined as 2 sigma p i divided by 2 i you know if you expand this that is sigma p i divided by 2 i. So, I can write it like this it is i going from 0 to n first one will be p 0 right I mean this will not be valid p 1 it should go from p 1. So, first one is p 1 plus p 1 by 2 and p 0 comes otherwise. So, p 0 divided by 2 i 0 if I put 0 then there is of course, it will be infinity not defined p 1 plus p 2 by 4 etcetera etcetera. So, this generalize it in this manner. So, surface modulus is defined by this this multiplied by d 0 will give us the total surface area. Now, shift 0 to 1 is you know average shift between 0 75 and 150. So, this corresponds to 5 33 when it is in millimeter size is in millimeter next for next level 1 and 2 it is 5 33 by 2 next level. So, therefore, specific surface of all aggregate will be surface modulus multiplied by 5 33 because surface modulus is defined as this term this multiplied by the specific surface of the smallest group 0 to 1 it gives you 5 33. Now, this is for spheres because we have used d by 6 d by 6 for actual aggregate angularity factor can be introduced and therefore, specific surface is given by 5 33 by you know angularity factor which we have defined earlier right. So, this is what is surface modulus because for irregular shape particle for circle this is the surface area is minimum for irregular shape particle surface area will increase 1 by psi which increases with irregularity or angularity this would this will be the specific surface. So, from surface modulus you can calculate out aggregate surface area specific surface of aggregate that is area per unit volume get an approximate idea about this. Some of the mixed design method uses surface modulus as a parameter to define the kind of you know compare to different aggregates. Well surface area is important because more the surface area more water you will require for wetting the aggregates but perhaps packing characteristics is more commonly used because that seems to be more logical. So, therefore, packing characteristics is more often than surface modulus some of the mixed design concepts uses surface modulus this index for finding out the proportions of aggregate etcetera. Now, the properties of aggregates the strength of aggregate is measured strength of aggregate is measured through aggregate crushing value aggregate crushing value because you see parent rock strength is usually is not relevant in case of concrete because once you fracture the parent rock it strength would be higher because fracture has already taken place through the fracture planes. So, whatever is remaining must be stronger or size effects sort of thing larger the size probability of finding a failure plane or fracture plane is more therefore, we no point using rock strength in aggregate second issue is you see the aggregate if they are in aggregation forms it is very difficult to measure their strength such. So, what we do is we compare to compare to aggregates we use a test called crushing value test. There is another similar test called impact you know aggregate impact value. So, crushing value test is very commonly used in this one what you do is we pass aggregates to 14 mm sheave and retain on 10 mm sheave. So, this only this size we take effect of sizes actually eliminated this is oven dried for 4 hours. So, moisture condition is again more or less finalized fixed standardized and then crushed under 400 kilo Newton in 10 minutes. So, the rate of loading is also fixed. Now, what will happen when you crush this once aggregates originally it was something like will then right and once you crush they will occupy this areas only this person, but they will have number of fines generated to crushing. So, then you see this material through 2.36 mm sheave and percentage passing is recorded 25 to 30 percent means good aggregate if it is high 40 45 percent then it is not so good aggregate comparatively 25 to 30 percent is good aggregate. So, can be used in concrete. So, therefore, this is used too much or relatively compared to aggregates relatively and also to specify the to use in specification that means, you specify that aggregate crushing value which is expressed as percentage should not be more than 32 or something like that for use in structural concrete and so on so forth. So, relative comparison one having lower crushing value is better compared to one having higher crushing value. You see then there is another way of testing the same one that is load required to produce 10 percent fine is another variant of this test. So, in this one we find out percentage passing, but in another variant of this test we try to find out the load required to produce 10 percent fines, load required to produce 10 percent fine. What is done is progressively load is increased to obtain penetration in 10 minutes. So, then this should be 15 millimeter for rounder aggregate. So, this penetration is specified increase the load such that you get a penetration of 15 millimeter in 10 minutes. So, thus you get a penetration these are your aggregates. So, the change new here is a new aggregate after crushing this should be 15 millimeter for rounder aggregate. Then 20 millimeter for crushed aggregate already crushed aggregate because this will have still some failure plane this will have less. So, this is what you do 20 millimeter for honeycomb aggregate we have looked into honeycomb aggregate when you talk of shape. So, this is what is given and then percentage passing through 2.36 millimeter C B is found out should be between 7.5 to 12.5 percent. And let us say let us we got Y for load X. So, the load is unknown here you try to find out how much is the load required to achieve this much penetration or this much penetration or this much penetration depending upon type of aggregate. And let us say the load is X for a penetration of you know Y not penetration Y percentage passing through 2.36 percent shape 10 percent fine because you want to find out how much will be 10 percent what is the load required for 10 percent fine. So, supposing you found out 7.5 percent is X load. So, 10 percent fine value is given by this 14 plus Y by 4. So, why you found out at a given load right why you found out at a given load X. So, for X you found out you know for Y percentage Y percentage is for X load 1 percentage is for Y by X by Y load right. But Y plus 4 is used Y plus 4 is used. So, this into 14. So, that gives us the 10 percent right. So, this should be 10 percent fine 10 percent fine. So, here 10 plus 4 Y plus 4 and 10 plus 4. So, it is assumed that things you know 4 mm you will be just getting straight forward after that it varies linearly. So, 14 Y plus 4 Y is what you have found out and 10 plus 4 is 14. So, this is the relationship used to find out the 10 percent value 10 percent and this is also used as a as an air stick for comparing 2 aggregates as used as an air stick to compare 2 different aggregates. Impact value is also measured on the same machine you take materials passing through 14 millimeter C and 10 mm C. All these are specified quantity etcetera. The aggregate should be saturated dry surface dry and now only thing you have a standard hammer falling 15 types under self load. So, you have a hammer which is lifted up and down which is lifted up and down 10 you know it is just lifted up and down. So, under self weight that hammer mass falls through a standard height 15 times and then find out how much is the percentage passing through 2.36 mm. So, then you see it through 2.36 mm and percentage passing is recorded 25 30 45 for concrete floor pavement you know for concrete 25 is recommended for concrete for floor 30 pavement and other use 45 percent. So, aggregate impact value 10 percent fine value and aggregate crushing value these are the measures for strength relative you know these are used for relative strength comparison of aggregate and it must satisfy the minimum record. Otherwise strength or the concrete will be limited by aggregate itself in normal concrete strength of the concrete is not limited by aggregate because aggregate really fails as you shall see later on. Aggregate abrasion value particles between 14 mm and 20 mm are bonded using standard setting compound. So, you want to find out the aggregate abrasion value quite useful in case of pavement and flooring where you expect lot of abrasion will be there. Abortion is caused by standard grinding and lapping through 500 revolution with a single size standard sand. So, you cause abrasion through sand of single size right. So, this is called lapping and grinding and percentage loss of mass is a measure of abrasion resistance. So, you grind it putting sand on top of it and once you have done that some of the aggregates will become powder loss of mass will be there. So, loss of mass is measured and that gives us abrasion resistance lower it is better lower the mass better is a. Abortion resistance loss and your test is another one which uses steel balls and standard graded aggregate rotated together in a drum in a standard manner. So, there it was sand through which you are grinding in this case you have steel balls and the aggregates they are rotated in a standard drum in a standard manner and percentage loss of mass is measured and that gives us abrasion as well as attrition. Specific gravity, specific gravity picnometer can be accurately filled up to a specified volume. Supposing I have got a bottle or something like that you know and which I can fill in up fill you know I can close it possibly something like this I have a steel lead is there and I can fill it the water up to some specified volume. Then these the one weight of the aggregate. So, mass of this picnometer full of water that is C. So, first I found it what is C is the mass of the water full mass of the meter is sample and water that is B. Now, you remove some you know you put this open dry aggregate and all the time you will have water filled up to same height. So, remove water such that it feels only up to the fixed height all the time that is volume is fixed. So, let us say that mass is B. So, B is equals to D plus W that is D plus some weight of water C is equals to weight of water this W plus weight of same volume of aggregate weight of same volume of aggregate. So, B minus C will give you B minus C will give you D minus W A that means that is the mass of the aggregate open dried mass of the aggregate minus mass of the same volume of water. The apparent specific gravity therefore, one can calculate out D divided by D minus B minus C because B minus C is this. So, if you subtract from D you get the mass of water of the having same volume. Now, if you are doing it in C g s units that is centimeter grams per C C. So, then in that case simply specific gravity you can find out without deviation or anything of that kind simply D will be D divided by specific gravity will be D divided by D minus B minus C. This includes impermeable pores the D specific gravity is not specific gravity of the material, but it is apparent specific gravity because the pores which are not filled by water will be considered as solid in this sort of measurement. Sometime, where jake method is used to find out the specific gravity of coarse aggregate that means you have a jacket killing the mass put it in water. So, see the volume of water displaced from that you can find out you know you take again weight in the submerged conditions. So, from that you can find out accurately volume of water displaced and then find out the specific gravity. The basket as aperture as 1 to 3 millimeter is suspended from a balance to water tight tank and let us say D is the one right weight. Mass of empty basket in water is C mass of aggregate and basket in water is B. So, B minus C is mass of aggregate in water and that is the loss in weight you know. So, apparent specific gravity will be 1000 D divided by D minus B minus C because if everything is in K G then you have to multiplied by 1000 in order to get the specific gravity. What you are doing you are using simply Archimedes principle the mass of the you know there is a loss in weight of the material when you submerge them in water and the loss in weight is equals to the mass of the volume of water displaced. So, using this concept you can find out the specific gravity using this formula again it includes all pores impermeable pores as well. So, this varies from 2.226 to 2.62 to 2.7. So, A is the absorptive and the velocity absorption basically if A is the mass of aggregate in SSD condition bulk specific gravity is sometime given by this A bulk density you can say. Supposing I find out A is a mass of the aggregate A minus B minus C in the same manner you can call it bulk specific gravity where A is the mass of aggregate not oven dried condition but in what is called saturated surface dry condition. We look into saturated surface dry condition quickly. Saturated surface dry condition refers to situation where absorbed moisture is present inside while surface is dry and that is a standard condition used because it is very difficult to control them you know like define or standardize the moisture content. But saturated surface dry that means inside there is water outside surface is dry that you can find out by wiping of the water from the surface using a flannel coque cloth or something of that kind or even by visual observation while drying sand the color would change suddenly from wet to the dry state you know surface dry state right. So, water absorption is a measured with respect to oven dry condition always we do that free water is the water content in concrete that excludes water required for SSD condition because SSD condition saturated surface dry condition is considered to be the standard in case of concrete because you know water will be absorbed by the aggregate themselves. Now this water has to be taken into account in adding water while we add water for mixing because this water will not be available and either for reaction nor for mixing purposes we exclude out water which is absorbed inside the aggregate so surface dry and wet water inside that we call as saturated surface dry condition and it is a standard condition that is used for moisture content for moisture content you know content of aggregate in concrete production as well as mixed design. This illustrate what is SSD condition this is bone dry fully oven dry situation there is no water there are pores no water if you come to this this is air dry that means the air surface has dried out fully up to certain depth but moisture is still inside. If it is saturated surface dry condition there is moisture inside all through but surface there is no moisture and moist is even outside you will have a layer of water. So, this is our standard condition right so these are absorbed moisture and this is also absorbed moisture this is somewhat you will have some free moisture from this point to this point excess water outside and we do not in our standard condition you consider this because this is a fixed condition this might vary depending upon porosity this might vary depending upon porosity but this is the standard condition and the water now inside will not be available it will be absorbed by the aggregate and will not be available for reaction. So, therefore, that is why this is used as a standard condition saturated surface dry condition this can be determined by drying from saturation signifies by a color change or by drying with thick quartz cloth. So, you take thick coarse cloth flannel or something of that kind wipe off the water from the surface and that is SSD condition. Then volume changes due to frost action thermal action and wetting drying relates to soundness this is also somewhat measure. Bulking is increase in volume with moisture for sand it is only for fine particle because particle okay particle will absorb sand particle can absorb moisture sand particle can absorb moisture it can absorb moisture in the surrounding sand particle can absorb moisture in the surrounding right. So, sand particle can absorb moisture in the surrounding in its outside periphery it can actually absorb absorb absorb moisture. Now, when it absorbs moisture its effective size increases. So, initially there will be pushing of the particle but a time comes when all this water collapses and particle sand comes close to each other. So, if you plot volume for a fixed mass then you get this sort of curve it the volume increases with moisture content of sand it increases picks up a peak and then it reduces reduces. So, this is called bulk buckling I mean bulking of sand bulking of sand it becomes bulk volume increase well this this has got do not have much to do because we do not use volumetric mix design but one must remember this because it will change the packing characteristics particle size becoming larger it will change the packing characteristics. So, this is important from that point of view otherwise bulking is not very important because in mix design we do not want do you do not use volumetric batching in earlier days quantity the amount of moisture content corresponding to bulking was an important issue because volumetric batching was done. So, you have to had a correction in terms of volume since you do mass basis these are all not required and you always consider the aggregate in SSD condition. So, this issue is not so relevant thermal conductivity is an important property and it is and coefficient of thermal expansion of concrete it depends largely on aggregate thermal conductivity of concrete is a function of aggregate thermal conductivity and it would depend upon type of aggregate and moisture content. Siment paste has a thermal coefficient of thermal expansion has 5.5 into 10 to the power minus 6 and aggregate has got different and it should be compatible with the cement paste for durability. So, generally order of concrete thermal conductivity is maybe 6 to 20 into 10 to the power thermal coefficient of thermal expansion is of this order per degree centigrade. Thermal conductivity is varying may vary from 1 watt meter degree centigrade or degree Kelvin to about 2.5 or 3 watt meter degree Kelvin depending upon aggregate type maximum is for quartz or quartzite. Now, important aspect is deleterious materials you know I am telling you that finer size we take aggregate size we take is a sand finer than that size like silt etcetera they are harmful in concrete. The reason is silt always is a tendency in this very fine size. So, it has got kind of forces surface forces and which will actually make it to get stick stuck to the aggregate surface. So, silt clear etcetera they will get stuck to the aggregate surface and if cement will not be bonded to the aggregate. So, this are important ones, but besides that there are some other deleterious material impurities which interfere with the hydration process like organic matter from decay of vegetable such as humus or deleterious materials. This is tested by observing the color change while neutralizing with 3 percent sodium hydroxide. Dark color after 24 hours in the indicate organic impurities. So, organic impurities are tested with alkyl is and the color change tells us because the organic impurities they can react with alkyl is and color change test tells us whether there is a organic impurity deleterious organic impurities in the aggregate right. You see this is why clay we do not want. Clay prevent coating and development of good bonds silt also does this little bit, but also it will increase water demand because it is very fine. So, if you are trying to use silt in the aggregate system or there is too much of silt let us say more than 3.5 percent or something like that then it will have a tendency to absorb a lot of water. Clay would obviously do not allow any bond between the aggregate and the cement hydrates. So, actually the strength will be lower. We can unsound aggregate themselves are harmful. So, we aggregate means aggregate crushing value very high you do not like them and unsound aggregate means which themselves will expand in volume they will cause cracking of the concrete. Maximum deleterious substance should be 15 percent in crushed rock fines and 10 percent for all crushed aggregates. 3 percent of crushed rock partially crushed crushed rock or partially crushed sand these are the limits and percentage passing through 75 mm sieve should be less than 3 percent by mass of sand. This is the silt or clay this should be less. So, these are percentages are given for sand clay silt and fine dust is determined simply by decontation. You put it in a jar measuring flask and wait for long period of time you will find that silt will settle at the top because is a finite size sand will go at the bottom and the color distinction through from color distinction one can find out what is the percentage of particles fine at the 75 micron and that should not be more than 3 percent should be less than 3 percent. Well you can do wet sieving to find out do sieve analysis for coarsen fine aggregate and salt contamination due to soluble chloride or salt causing a fluorescence can be removed by washing. So, if you put for example, aggregates in water for some time and if you find color is white white fluorescence or salt getting deposited to the top that would be some sort of leaching or fluorescence by washing they can be removed. Unsoundness that is volume changes are due to non durable impurities, disruptive action during freeze-throw action this is what and clay lumps of shell if they are there they will expand in volume would call leads to pitting and scaling these are unsoundness, mica and gypsum sulphides and sulphides shall be avoided. Some they result in kind of unsoundness in the sense there will be expensive changes durability properties will be hampered and this is option during freeze-throw action could be there. So, we do sieve analysis as I said earlier to find out the grading and this is the sieve analysis typical sieve analysis result. What it shows is percentage passing. Versus size you know 175 micron 150 300 600 up to 10 mm size it is shown 100 percent is going along passing along 10 mm and so on. This for sieve analysis all grading curve for 10 mm msa aggregate this can similar things you can plot for 20 and for 10 mm also is in a stm sieve number or size is in inches 3 8 inch then 4 numbers 8 number 100 number 200 number sieve this is normally the standard most of the standard uses this. Well to get a good to get a good grading you may have to blend aggregates for example you may have to blend aggregates for example you have 150 let us say 150 there is a sieve cumulative passions to 150 mm is 100 percent to 75 is 55 percent to 40 mm is 20 and 20 mm is 13 and 10 mm is 5. Let us say available grading this is what is my desirable grading just as an example how do you do blending I want 100 percent should pass to 150 mm see 55 percent pass should pass to 75 mm see 40 percent should I mean 40 28 percent should pass to 40 mm see and etcetera. What is available to me is 98 percent passing through 150 10 percent passing through 75 this is grading 1 and this nothing passing through this and I have got second aggregate 150 100 percent 75 92 which is you know 46 nothing through 20 and 10 and then I have got third sieve 150 100 and something available here also and if you can see this 4th one which has got large number fine so this is a fine finer particles less fine still lesser fine and this is the coarser one this is the coarser one and I want to get a blended aggregate of satisfying this desirable grading. So what I do I have 4 I have got 4 aggregates aggregates graded aggregates and I got to mix them right I got to mix them to find out the desirable grading. So basically proportion of each one I must have so let us say a b c d are the proportions of 1 2 3 4 aggregates then at 75 mm micron on 75 mm size here if I take you know if you look at this one first one first one 75 mm see only 10 percent passes. So if I take a amount of this aggregate 1 it is multiplied by 0.1 will be the quantity of 75 percent per 25 mm available to me. Similarly if b is the amount of you know b is the amount of aggregates I take from grading 2 available grading 2 so this multiplied by the corresponding value that is 92.92 so this multiplied by 0.92 and similarly the value of the value of the quantity for c and d that would be the quantity of materials passing through 75 mm. How much I should have this must be equals to 55 percent of my overall so 0.55 of a plus b plus c plus d so I can set an equation at 75 mm size and this is what I am trying to do and this is what I am trying to do. So I am trying to put an equations for 75 mm size 0.1 a 0.92 b 0.1.0 c 1.0 d because that did not 100 percent was passing through them must be equals to 0.55 a b c d. Similarly for 40 mm size there is hardly anything nothing for a only 6 percent for b 0.94 percent of the c aggregate passing through 40 mm and 100 percent passes for d aggregate and desirable is 0.28 I can set a third equation. Now I must set 4 such equations because I have 4 unknowns so for 20 mm so I had actually 150 mm I had 75 mm 40 mm 20 mm and 10 mm so for 4 such once I can set 4 equations, 4 equations, 4 equations here of course we have done one thing we have assumed a equals to 1 so that 1 is eliminated straight away so I need only 3 equations. So if I assume a is equals to 1 because you know I can if I assume a equals to 1 rest all can be obtained as a fraction of a itself. So assuming a equals to 1 for 75 mm size this is 1 and this is right it will be given so I get an expression involving b c and d if I assume this equals to 1. Similarly for 40 mm size I will get an expression involving b c d and for 20 mm size I will get an expression using b c d and I can solve them I can solve this 3 equations. These are the 3 equations I am getting well I could have solved 4 equations also it is not difficult because it is question of matrix. So simply solving the 4 you know like a b c d are your unknowns you had a matrix on this side the coefficients are known etcetera a 1 4 and so on a 4 1 a 4 4 and that is the right hand side is known to you. So you just got to invert the matrix or solve it this days it is not very difficult to solve it in excel and that is what you can do. However by convention and wisdom or the old days one would actually solve this 3 by 3 unknowns can be solved by Gaussian elimination process or 4 unknowns can be also solved by Gaussian elimination process. That means divide the equation 1 if these are the 3 are the case just for example purpose divide this by 0.37 and multiply equation 1 by 0.22 and add and 0.13 and this divide by 0.37 multiplied by 0.22 and multiplied by 0.13 and simply add you will eliminate out b and if you do that you will eliminate out b the equation then get something like this the equation then get is something like this then you take 1 pivot this element divide equation 2 by 0.93 and multiply equation 2 by 1.216 and subtract and 1 0.68 and subtract from equation 1 and 3 and this will lead to b c equals to this then the next step would be divide this equation by 0.88 and you get the value of d so multiply this by 1.06 0 and subtract from this then you will get straight away value of c and if you do this process you get b c d equals to 0.22.29 and 0.28 you have assumed a equals to 1 so a b c d proportion of this is 1.5 you know 0.52029 and 0.28 so proportions is what we are looking at therefore a b c d proportions you can get so aggregate blending can be done in this manner simply and obtain you will get 4 equations one of them of course you can assume to be 1 because you want to find the proportion of all the 4 of them or 5 of them depending upon how many aggregates you have. So if you have 4 aggregates what you do you set 4 equations at 4 important points and then 4 equations because you know the proportion of desirable grade for desirable grading and proportionate in each of the grading you can sum this up and by summing up get you know the you can form those equations assume one of them equals 1 rest all then you can determine and this is how you can find out the proportions. So you can find out the proportions right so you can find out the proportions so from this you can actually determine because now instead of 1 relative proportion you want to find out you will find out 0.48 0.48 for a because this is 1 1 divided by the total so this is the 48 percent will be the a multiplied by 0.5 to 28 25 percent will be b 14 percent multiplied by 0.29 will be c and multiplied by 0.28 will be almost similar so this is the proportions of a b c d right. So this is how finally therefore I get this by solving this equation I get 150 each one of them this is the proportions of each one of them will be this and blended aggregate quantity I can calculate out because I know 150 this is my desirable 98 into 0.48 100 into 0.25 100 into 0.14 and 100 into 0.13 gives me 99.04 and 100 into 0.13 gives me 99.04 10 into 0.48 92 into 0.25 and 100 into 0.14 and 100 into 0.13 will give you 54.8 and so on and if you calculate out all of them you get the blended aggregate. So therefore total you can find out and this is how you can obtain the proportion of all the aggregates. So therefore this is how we you know we find out the proportions of aggregate right. So to summarize to summarize just to summarize we have actually in this module 3 we have looked into aggregates packing characteristics test some index like fineness modulus and surface modulus but in the beginning we also defined how do we define size shape and they are important in packing we have looked into. This some of these ideas will be very useful when you discuss workability and other issues. Thank you very much. === Lecture 9 Transcript === Welcome to Concrete Technology. Module 3, lecture 1. In module 3, we shall be looking into a mixture in concrete. First lecture, we will look into chemical admixtures and the second lecture also we will look into chemical admixtures and the subsequent lectures will be on mineral admixtures. Recall that we are talking about concrete being six components which include cement, water, fine aggregate, coarse aggregate and other two other two different types of admixtures. That is chemical admixtures and mineral admixtures. So, these are mass in modern engineered concrete. You cannot think of a concrete, a modern engineered concrete which is without chemical admixtures or mineral admixtures. So, let us look into module 3 lecture 1. Our discussions today will follow. First, we will look into role of chemical admixtures and largely we will be concentrating ourselves on water reducing agents today which are called plasticizers, super plasticizers and hyper plasticizers. The nomenclatures of course, vary. Some cases people call them plasticizers, super plasticizers and hyper plasticizers. Some other people call them as water reducing agent, high range water reducing agent and very high range water reducing agent. So, our discussions should be focused towards that today. But before that, we must look into the definition of admixture. Admixture admixtures are chemicals added to chemicals added to concrete during the time of its production. During the time of its production, the production of the chemical admixture is also added to mortar or grout. Essentially, at the time of mixing to modify properties either in wet state or after the mixes hardened. So, admixtures are essentially added to the conventional concrete I will say which are cement water, fine aggregate and coarse aggregate to modify the property as we desire. The property can be properties during the setting stage or in fresh state or after it is hardened. Can be a single chemical or number of chemicals. Can be a single chemicals or number of chemical or number of chemical. It can be a single chemical or composition of mixture of number of chemical, mixture of number of chemicals. So, generally in solution form, generally in solution form, typically 30 to 35 percent would be 30 to 35 percent would be 30 to 35 percent would be solid active chemicals and rest all are solvent. So, it is in solution form, typically 35 to 40 percent active chemicals, rest all are solvent. Generally, amount added is very small. That is why amount added is very small less than 5 percent quite often less than 2 percent. So, generally less than 5 percent quite often it is less than 2 percent. So, that is why you call them as admixture. Now, historically if you see it, the plastic sizes or water reducing agents as we shall be seeing them, they came in 1932 and more effective plasticizers which are called super plasticizers, they came in 1963. So, this is the air-entering agent is an admixture which is used for in cold countries mostly in cold countries came in 1940s and very high range water reducing agents came in 1980s and 90s. So, plasticizer 1932 air-entering agent 1941, super plasticizer 1963, and the water and you know these are very highly effective high range water reducing agent polycarboxylate ether they came in 1990 to 1999. Now, although it came quite early, they are usage, you know they are not so popular in the beginning. So, practically they started becoming popular much later perhaps in 60s 70s and if you see country like India, it is in 1990s in large infrastructure, but most of the concrete today manufactured in India or possibly many other developing countries of like ours large quantity of admixtures are not used in non-mechanized concrete. So, in India large quantity of concrete is not mechanized and there hardly any admixture is used. So, that is the history of their use, but we classify this admixtures depending upon direction. For example, those who chemically interact during the hydration process, their essential purpose would be to accelerate the setting or hardening process or both and detarders are the ones which actually reduces down the pace of hydration. Therefore, retards the setting process. So, retarders and accelerators they actually interact during the hydration period and they cause either acceleration of the hydration process, some cause retardational hydration process. Plasticizer and super plasticizer I was just mentioning, these are adsorbed, you know they get adsorbed on the cement surface and they cause better particle dispersion. So, in a way they are dispersant, particle dispersant, cement particle dispersant causes dispersion of the cement particle separate them out from one from you know if it was the original situation, plasticizer will separate them out. So, that is what particle dispersant are. So, second class they get adsorbed on the surface and disperses the particles. So, plasticizer, super plasticizer, hyper plasticizer they belong to this group. Air and training agent essentially physically allow air to be entrained into the concrete, but they affect is you know their action is they change the surface tension properties of water. So, they affect the surface tension properties of water because you know bubble formation, air bubble formation is dependent on the surface tension properties of the air you know and I mean liquid because it is a liquid air interface, liquid air interface. So, surface tension if you want to make the water to entrape or entrained more air then surface tension properties of the water has to be modified and that is what the air entraining agent does. So, classification based on action is the one that affects the surface tension actually air entraining agent belongs to that category. Some can affect the rheology of concrete for example, viscosity modifier, viscosity modifier affects the rheology of concrete that is change the viscosity at the plastic stage during the plastic stage and largely used in self compacting concrete or even in underwater concrete one can use those they are similar to anti wash out end mixtures. So, they actually affect the rheology of water viscosity property of water they can modify the viscosity of water in other words it can thicken the water will look into that when we will discuss in details. Then there are specific special chemicals they act on hard and concrete like corrosion inhibitors and water repellent, corrosion inhibitors water repellent and then there is a high-end of the water repellent and there is a high-end of the water repellent. So, this is how this is the classification based on their action but simultaneous classification or simultaneous name is also given side by side they can be classified as accelerator retarders, plasticizers, super plasticizers in you know then air entraining agent viscosity based on their action accelerator and retarder interacts during hydration process, plasticizer and super plasticizer actually get adsorbed onto the surface of the particle and cause particle dispersion. Air entraining agent modifies the surface tension properties of the water, viscosity modifier will modify the viscosity of water. So, change the rheological properties corrosion inhibitors will of course, stop the corrosion process the chemical electro chemical reaction somewhere it will stop either anodically or cathodically. So, this is the classification of admixtures but first we will concentrate on dispersing admixtures that is the plasticizer, super plasticizer etcetera. 60 percent of the admixtures used worldwide are dispersing admixtures you know the name plasticizer, super plasticizer and hyper plasticizer etcetera. So, most of the admixtures used in concrete belong to this category that is dispersing admixture. So, first one is the plasticizer as we said that came pretty early and this can reduce actually water the plasticize the concrete. So, they essentially reduce the water, water demand in concrete you can make it plastic with less water that is the idea. So, they plasticize the concrete. So, if you add them into the concrete they will make it more plastic more flowable therefore, for same plasticity you can reduce down the water required. So, plasticizer if you add them they improve the plasticity of concrete make them more plastic and therefore, they are water reducing as well as well for the same kind of plasticity or cohesiveness or similar sort of I mean other plasticity is the terminal terminology I will use for same kind of fresh concrete property they can reduce the water. Therefore, we call them as water reducing agent as well. So, water you know essentially nomenclature differs in a steam classification largely they will call them as water reducing agent whereas, some other nomenclature they be called as plasticizer. Now, this plasticizers can reduce water requirement by 12 percent to 5 percent. So, it will be more than 5 percent less than 12 percent. So, water quantity for same effect plastic plasticizing effect it will reduce the water by this amount that dosage generally the amount you add is only 0.2 to 0.6 percent of the cement or that is on cement. So, if you have 300 kg of cement so, 0.2 percent of that would be 0.6 kg in a meter cube. So, you see 0.2 percent to 0.6 percent. So, it will be about 1.8 kg you see 3 kg is 1 percent 0.3 is 0.1 percent so, this is 0.2 to 0.6 percent. So, this much you will be adding in 1 meter cube of concrete you can see that quantity is very small this quantity is very small this quantity is very very small. So, dosage is low 0.2 to 0.6 percent and the material that has been used are lignosulfonate. Lignosulfonates are natural polymer from mood that is obtained after removal of sugar and carbohydrates you know various carbohydrates. So, that is and then sulfonated will come to this process anyway a little bit more. So, lignosulfonates are the natural polymers that is obtained from mood the source is would. Then there are others like poly carboxylate ether based plus t size r. So, there the plus t size r could be either poly carboxylate or lignosulfonate. We will discuss this the chemistry a little bit more there use is usually for low to medium slump concrete. Now, slump is a terminology we have not introduced to you at the moment is a terminology related to moldability or working on fresh concrete. So, we will discuss this sometime later on. So, generally useful for low to moderate slump concrete low to moderate slump concrete. Super plus t size r is the next variety super plus t size r is the next variety. Which reduces the water from 12 percent to about 30 percent. So, 12 percent to about 30 percent reduction water reduction is 12 percent to 30 percent and dosage of course, is now higher. So, it can you know it can cement takes more of it more of this material it can adsorb because we said that they get adsorb at the surface of the particle that is cement particle. And this they get more quantity can be adsorbed on the surface of the cement particle. And dosage is usually dosage is usually 0.6 to 2 percent of the cement. So, that means, it was it was 300 kg of cement earlier and maximum you would have added is 1.8 kg of plus t size r. But super plus t size r you might it from 1.8 to about 6 kg. So, that is the dosage is generally higher, but their action is also higher note that their action is also higher they they are more effective. And that is why the name that is why the name super plus t size r you see plus t size r then super plus t size r. Well, the hyper plus t size r is also built in this we have not made a separate list here separate classification. So, super plus t size r or high range water reducing agent and very high range water reducing agent that is hyper plus t size r they are all included here. Now, they are synthetic and three types first is self-enated polymers of naphthalene formaldehyde condensate. So, self-enated polymers of naphthalene formaldehyde condensate or self-enated polymers of melamine formaldehyde condensate there is a two variety second variety. So, they are self-enated polymers of naphthalene formaldehyde condensates or melamine formaldehyde condensates and third variety is polycarboxylic ether. So, these are the three varieties of super plus t size r and you know that includes the hyper plus t size r as well chemically there this kind. May if you look at the chemistry of the plus t size rs wood is made up of lignin and cellulose. Now, 20 percent lignin is present in wood and of course, it has got variable structure depending upon the type of wood the season it is taken from the wood and so on so forth. So, it has got a variable structure and about 20 percent is present in the wood. Now, paper industry they make pulp out of the wood paper industry make pulp out of the wood. So, in this pulping process lignin is self-enated and in what is self-enation this is treated with olium which is nothing, but a solution of S O 3 in S O 3 concentrated sulphuric acid. In fact, you will write it as so lignin is treated with this lignin is treated with this that is called sulphination that is called sulphination. So, lignin is treated with this is sulphinated that is treated with olium to make it soluble and then it is further hydrolyzed or fermented to remove carbohydrate. So, paper it is actually a product from paper industry in the pulping process lignin is sulphinated it is treated with olium in the process of sulphination and then further hydrolyzed of fermented to remove carbohydrate. The key part in this one is in lignosulfonate of course, phenyl profane units that can link up to form polymer. So, in this one chemically phenyl propane is a unit which can polymerize and that polymer is a key part which is responsible for plasticizing effect which is responsible for plasticizing effect. Now, the phenyl profane looks like this you know this is phenyl with hydroxyl ion. So, this is phenyl and the S O 3 sulphinated S O 3 right this is sulphinated this is the simplified sulphinated phenyl profane units and it has got a sodium S O 3 with sodium that is linked sodium you can see this and this is the units it get polymerized. So, this is essentially the structure of the phenyl profane unit which is the chemical which is responsible for plasticizing effect this structure is heavily cross linked. So, the polymer that is formed out of this is heavily cross linked that means, you know a cross link is this are linear change for example, there could be a linear another one another of this molecule and another of this molecule they will form change and when there are several change which are cross linked cross linked in 3 D let us say 2 D 3 D that is cross linked. So, we say that cross linked several such change are connected in between this is cross linked. So, the polymer structure is heavily cross linked and they form actually a spherical micro gel like this. So, active micro gel group so it forms a spherical micro gel right it forms a spherical micro gel like this you know. So, these are the active micro gel groups this are the active micro gel groups and you can see they are all linked up cross linked in a 3 D structure. So, it is almost like a heavily cross linked spherical micro gel so that is what the structure forms and it is molecular weight of course, if you look at it varies from 2000 to 60,000 2000 to 60,000 right 2000 to 60,000 that is the molecular weight in normal carbon 12 scale and in the solution what happens is the active sulphurate group the active sulphurate group dissociate 2 you know SO 3 there is something more on this side and SO 3 which will be negative plus the sodium. So, sodium plus separates out sodium ion separates out leaving this portion negatively charged therefore, micro gel which is there in the micro gel structure of the phenyl profane and it clips it with negative charge. Now, this negatively charged molecule with each other you know and if they are all negatively charged molecule they will push the particle apart. So, that is the whole idea the mechanism of course, you will understand better. So, it is the negatively charged now this negative charge ensure its attachment to the cement particle as well because SO 3 sodium dissociates so, sodium dissociates, so, 3 and negative charge this can get attached to the cement particle this can get attached to the cement particle and induce a kind of negative charge onto the cement particle itself and thereby cause dispersion, cause dispersion. So, you look into this slightly more in details as we follow through. The second one is super plasticized which is sulfonated naphthen formality high condensate and we call it SNF. So, this is sulfonated naphthen formality high condensates or poly naphthen sulfonate is this also another nomenclature is there poly naphthen sulfonate PNS more commonly used is SNF that is sulfonated naphthen formality high condensates. So, SNF some people call it poly naphthen sulfonate as well PNS and this is obtained by sulfonating petroleum or coal tar naphthen at high temperature. So, you see this is also sulfonated in the same manner as the ligno lignin and this is done at high temperature. So, naphthen is now sulfonated at high temperature to obtain this material. The product is then polymerized with formaldehyde and neutralized with sodium calcium or some other metal I mean usually sodium and calcium salts and molecular weight is small. That is why the quantity adsorbed onto the cement surfaces more quantity adsorbed onto the cement surfaces more and therefore, more possibly negative charge therefore, more action compared to plasticizer. So, less molecular weight more negative charge because more it can be adsorbed onto the surface of the particle more negative charge and therefore, more dispersion that is the idea that is the idea that is the idea. Let us see the chemical structure of it. Nethylene structure is this this is the Nethylene structure and this is the sulfonated SO3 and the sodium with it and then this is polymerized N number of them it will repeat N number of them it will repeat this is actually CH2 this is 2 has gone there this is CH2 this is CH2 the 2 has gone there. So, that this is a small correction actually this is a small correction the 2 has gone down 2 is here actually. So, this CH2 CH2 right this is the polymer. So, this is an Nethylene is 2 benzene ring combined together and in one of its R would be SO3 NA right and this way is the polymerized this when this is actually you know simplified formula shown sulfonated polymer formaldehyde condensates right sulfonated Nethylene formaldehyde condensates polymer. So, simplified structure is shown and this chain is linear. So, it is a linear chain is linear. So, it is a linear chain will be formed several of them linear chain will be formed and it is free to rotate about formaldehyde derivative CH2 and SO3 NA group can be above or below. So, it is above you know and this axis it can rotate and therefore, this can be above or below this can be above or below this can be above or below. Anyway, the main important issue is one dissociation one dissolution if you put in water this component will dissociate into something all other components SO3 with negative charge plus sodium positive charge like the lignosalponate and this will now affect the dispersion in the same manner because this being negative it can get attached to the surface of the cement which has got cationic surface charges and there it can get attached and induce negative charge onto the cement particle itself. So, similar action as the lignosalponate only difference being more quantity more quantity can be adsorbed and it is more action is more prominent. The next one is sulfonated melamine formaldehyde condensates and this is similar as SNF that is the earlier one that we looked at sulfonated naphthalene formal dehyde except that melamine ring replaces the naphthalene double ring. So, melamine ring will replace the naphthalene double ring this is available only as sodium salts not as calcium salts molecular weight is higher than SNF. So, slightly higher than SNF and that is how it will look at look like. So, this is the naphthalene double ring replaced by melamine which has got 3 nitrogen which has got 3 nitrogen you know in the ring instead of carbon. So, this is the melamine everything else remains same and here is your SO3NA which is the main important component and on addition to water this sodium will dissociate out living everything else negative which can get attached to the cement particle surface and cause dispersion. So, this is a simplified sulfonated melamine formaldehyde condensates polymer you know with N number degree of polymerization. So, that is showing this showing the same. The last variety that is poly carboxyl ethythres these are also called poly carboxylate you know PC based poly carboxylate simply or combed polymer carboxylates are nothing but derivatives from you know they come from carboxylac acid having COO H group. So, this is H gets replaced in case of salt this will be replaced by carboxylate salt this will be replaced by metal and in case of E ether sorry in case of E esters there will be replaced by organic groups. Eethers are compounds which have got oxygen of this kind of structure and let us see how do they look in our case. The backbone polymer is typically obtained from polymerization of acrylic acid but can be substituted by other group. So, essentially carboxylic acid carboxylates are obtained from carboxylic acids which has got structure like this. So, typically they are obtained from acrylic acid but you can substitute other group. So, there is lot of possibility actually that is why you know many groups can act here and this group is finally, then neutralized by sodium that dissociate into solution. So, carboxylate group is neutralized by sodium and in solution sodium gets separated out leaving everything else negative which can get attached to the cement particle. The chemical structure will look something like this. So, this is your COO H is replaced by sodium CH and this is CH2 this should be CH2 2 should go up here actually this 2 should go up here it has got some or other distorted some or other it has got distorted three should be here rather than here CH2 CH2 here this is got distorted and this is CH2 this is also CH2 etcetera etcetera. So, this is not there this is not there all right this is got distorted. This there is a polymer here you can see this this is CH2 CH2 O and that is ether that is one ether. So, there is an ether here this is the poly carboxylate sodium carboxylate may be you know sodium whatever the you know sodium is there in the acid and in this one instead of sodium there is another ether polymer co polymer. So, there is a co polymer here so, there is a polymer here. So, you can see this is sodium it this will get dissociated this will attach to the cement particle this will attach to the cement particle right this will attach to the cement particle. But this one this branches where there is a polymer co polymer this is this will remain outside in the sense that this will remain attached to the branch. So, you have a comb structure this is the branch which is attached to the cement and something else is protruding out of it. So, this portion is protruding out of it and this is the this is the co polymer. More importantly you can change this co polymer it need not be CH2 CH2 O ethylene glycol you know as you shall see say the compound you can have any co polymer co polymer here ether co polymer you know as any other ether ether here. So, therefore, you can by changing this you can actually tailor made the property of this plasticizer. Let us see how it is done. So, this is the basic structure of poly carboxylate ether right. So, this the ether is here and idea is like this the co polymer here is polyethylene glycol CH2 CH2 O N other polymers can be used to tailor made the PC for desirable properties. So, this is the biggest advantage and this development took place in 1990s largely 1990s let say let us say late 1980s and late 90s. So, therefore, you can see the design we have a choice of actually designing various kind of or developing various kind of super plasticizer or as they are called they are called hyper plasticizer using this poly carboxylate ether type of formulation. The poly ether part is a special principle for what is known as steric effect I will come to steric effect because it is now comb structure structure is comb. So, this is your main chain which is the poly carboxylate chain and here is the ether. So, the ether group chain is here polymer. So, therefore, this honeycomb structure and this effectively increases the size of the particle effectively increases the size of the particle and causes further dispersion by size effect which is known as steric effect will come to that sometime later on again. The sodium that dissociates provides attachment point for PC. So, PC can PC gets attached to the cement because sodium will dissociate and that causes attachment to the PC. So, that is how that is how the that is how the you know chemistry of plasticizer and super plasticizer. Now, if you look into mechanisms of actions you can now look into the mechanisms of actions which more or less we understand from the chemistry. Basically, rheological properties of cement water paste is related to forces of attraction and repulsion. So, in the beginning when you add water the viscosity of that paste that you form or it is you know how much forces required to cause it to move or deform or yield if I may say. So, these are all function of the forces of attraction and repulsion with the cement particle themselves. So, two types of forces of course, we recognize one is a vendor was forces which are responsible for attractions. So, these are all forces between the covalent compounds in the cement as we have seen earlier when we looked into the chemistry of cement. They will cause attachment or they will try to bring them together. So, they are attractive forces whereas, you see the free surface balances they are essentially cationic in nature because calcium ion aluminum ion aluminum they are and they are cationic in nature that is why they can actually attach water also you know get attached to the water to form water of crystallization and the reaction that is hydration will do take place. So, they are positive in nature and they cause repulsion of this particle. Now, the repulsion in the beginning is less compared to expansion. So, vendor all forces dominates in normal cement paste thus flocks are formed. So, in the beginning if you do not add any plasticizer cement tend to flock together because of this force. Although this force is there this forces are more dominant and therefore, flocks formation do occur as it occurs in many other fine particle. But, when you add this super plasticizer or water reducing agent the super plasticizer get negatively it forms negatively charge component and then the metal ion that is sodium or calcium that you have added and this negatively charge is attached to positively charge cationic surface that they get absorbed irreversibly. So, because of their negative charge and because the cationic surface characteristics of the surface because of calcium aluminum etcetera this negatively charge self-onated compounds or negatively charge you know compound after dissociation of the metal gets attached to the cement particle get attached to the cement particle. Now, they since they are negatively charged they now induce is negative charges into the cement particle itself which can overcome the vendor walls forces and therefore, defloculation occurs defloculation occurs or dispersion occurs. So, they induce negative charge on the particle after adsorption and they cause dispersion. So, what are reducers are surface acting agents negatively charge as adsorbed on the cement particle or any other similar fine particle giving particles negative charge and this leads to repulsion this needs to leads to repulsion that is why they are dispersion. Now, negative charge also causes development of sheath of oriented water molecule around particles that is if this is your particle now everything is negatively charged and you know water is H 2 O is polar with this positive and negative charge not coinciding. So, therefore, water will get oriented water will get oriented and it will give you a sheath of oriented water molecules for wetting purpose and this results in release of this results in release of some water you know some water gets released from retaining mechanism of flocculated system and therefore, this water is available for more water is available for lubrication therefore, the plasticizing effect. So, two ways first it pushes but this is possibly true for lignos alphanates SNF and SMF PC will see on the other hand does something more. So, they essentially causes negative charge on to the particle pushes them apart not only that it creates a sheath of water molecule oriented water molecule around the particle and some water gets free because now it is easily weighted because of the discipline arrangement of the water accumulation of water at the surface some water gets free and thus how this water is available for further lubrication. So, they will look something like this water reducing agent will look something like this dispersing admixtures you know cement flocks and initially there are something like this each of them are very close to each other if you see they are flocks but now they got you know uniformly dispersed increasing fluidity. So, this increases the fluidity this is the fluidity this is how they will look the particles are this may be your particles this may be your particles the chain there if you since SNFs are linear polymers linear chain polymers they are creating negative charges and this negative charges ripple each other this is another particle these are the you know this is showing for SNF you can see the natural in the natural in rings double rings natural in the whole rings. So, this is actually you know SNF action shown so SNFs are double rings here double rings here. So, this SNFs and this is a polymer so long chain polymers with negatively charged negative charge around and this negative charge causing the pushing the particles apart pushing the particles apart you know pushing this particle apart. So, that is how causing effective dispersion causing effective dispersion. Now, this charge increase has been measured also and the potential this charge increases define in terms of zeta potential zeta potential is the potential difference between the dispersion medium that is your water in our case it is water and the stationary layer of fluid attached to the dispersed particle. So, if you have these are your particle and if your water layer water layer is surrounding water layer is somewhere here surrounding and water layer is somewhere here you know surrounding water layer is somewhere here right. So, this water layer and potential of the bulk water here this difference is called zeta potential. So, zeta potential is a delta v across the bulk dispersion and the one layer attached here that is how by definition this is the zeta potential and this zeta potential if you measure it is observed that as SNF dosage increases zeta potential negative remember this negative because potential is negative on the surface. So, minus 10 minus 10 minus milli volt this is which means this is plus 10 volt plus 10 and these are all negative just for the sake of plotting we are showing it this way. So, as you increase the SNF dosage the zeta potential which is negative zeta potential so negative zeta potential increases but beyond a point of course it does not increase further which tells us that possibly there is an optimal dosage beyond which there is no further improvement by adding SNF this may be this is also true for SMF or possibly even lignos alcones. So, negative potential has been confirmed by experimental studies through zeta potential studies and that is what this diagram shows. If you look at very high range water reducing agent or PC based super plus is as a reaction now you remember we said that this will have combed structures. So, there is another you know the co polymer ether so co polymer which is an ether this will be here this is the main carboxylate group. So, long chain and these are the graphed where you can put in any desirable ether depending upon the properties you require and because of this you find that long chain outside which are again polymers this particle gets dispersed more in fact it is attached here because of the sodium dissociation sodium dissociation it gets attached here right. So, negatively charge the whole thing and then the graphed or the co polymer that is the ether is somewhere here and that is what results in effective increase in effective size of the particle and pushes apart. So, this is called steric stabilization. So, therefore, the action of PC based admixtures are not the negative repulsion rather largely it is the it is the action of the co polymer which is graphed in and effective size increase because of the reaction of the shear size they push each other apart and they are quite more effective in any case this is a negative charge sheath of negative charge here as well as the surface. So, the steric effect is visual here for example, you can see that main chain main chain maintain and the branches are here. So, main chain the branches are on this side this branches causes pushing apart. So, steric effect is because of the size so, this is your cement particle this is your cement particle and because of the size they push each other more you know away from each other. So, push them away from each other right. So, dispersing admixtures continuing with that now let us see some of their usage how can you use them they have understood the chemistry somewhat and we have also tried to understand the mechanism of their action right. Now, how do you use them you can use them beneficially in fact, in my opinion or possibly opinion on most of the students of concrete and concrete technology these are must because these this has you know these materials I mean these admixtures is a must in an engineer concrete because it saves on cement and if you remember we talked about cement clinker is produced with the expense of energy and it also produces carbon dioxide greenhouse gas and we also said sometime in the very beginning then one turn of cement is equivalent to almost equivalent to one turn of carbon dioxide production cement in I mean clinker opic clinker here. Now, if you can reduce your cement consumption not only that you will make it cheaper, but you will possibly reduce if you can reduce your clinker consumption of course, you will reduce you know it will you help in reduction in greenhouse gas emission. Now, admixtures of plasticizers and super plasticizers have some sort of beneficial effect on these also let us see how they are consider a concrete with 28 day strength A and workability B and I want to get a strength of 28 day greater than a workability B when we study further we shall see that for doing that what I need is to reduce the water to cement ratio reduce I want to keep the workability same. So, largely the water I will keep same if I keep the water same right and I want to reduce the water cement ratio then I must increase the cement. So, I got to increase the cement. So, you want to go a concrete which is higher strength which is got higher strength compared to this this is A this is greater than A you dead cement, but same can be achieved through another route as well will come to that. But let us see in another case I do not want to increase the strength, but I want to make it easily moldable workability is a terminology which is related to moldability it should be ease ease of working on to it in fact, include what I can say. So, now you want to easily work on to it you got to add water right you got to add water because then it will be flowing and you can compact it easily that is very common sense tells us it is intricacy intricacy and details will look into sometime later on, but at the moment will assume that I have to add water, but then I want to keep the strength same and I said that we will understand the strength is a function of water to cement ratio higher the water cement ratio strength is lower. So, I have to maintain the water cement ratio therefore, I got to add both water as well as cement because I got to maintain water cement ratio same as this. So, I got to I will add delta W and proportionally I will have to add delta C such that W by C remains same. So, if this this was the W by C so, this has to remain same here. So, I am adding water adding cement as well here I did not want to increase the workability, but I have to I want to increase the strength therefore, I was adding cement alone. Now, same thing I can achieve by water reducing agent what I do I add water reducing agent then I will reduce the water. So, if I reduce the water keep the cement same water cement ratio is reduced automatically. So, I am having delta W divided by C. So, water cement ratio is reduced strength will be greater than a, waterability will be equals to same as what it was earlier. So, using WRA I can achieve the same thing therefore, whichever route is cheaper I will follow that I will follow that whichever part of this is cheaper route usually because quantity added is very small, but the secondary benefit you remember that you are reducing the carbon you know carbon dioxide emission as well. One to keep the strength same and workability same I will add some water reducing agent reduce the water content also reduce the C same. So, my W by C will remain same and therefore, I will get the same strength. So, I get the same strength by adding water reducing agent and with lower cement content. So, again I it might be cheaper route to add water reducing agent rather than add cement. So, you will have to see whichever is cheaper and the last case if I want to get this I simply add water reducing agent and this will ensure that I get higher workability, but same strength. So, you can see that by using water reducing agent we can say one to cement for same strength if I add water reducing agent I will reduce the water I will reduce the water also correspondingly cement also correspondingly therefore, there is a saving in cement and this might be cheaper route. Similarly, if I want to increase the strength use water reducing agent water will reduce, but cement will remain same therefore, strength may increase and if I want to simply increase the moldability I add water reducing agent without adding cement, but otherwise I would have had to add water as well as cement. So, this is how we can use in the next class we will look into this again some more issues related to this we will see same thing can be explained in different manner for example, without plasticizer water content is here the workability is here. Now, you add plasticizer then the or plasticizer water reducing agent just add them it will be more flowing concrete, but if you reduce the water use a lower quantity of water you will get higher same strength you know you will get same workability. So, this will make higher strength concrete. So, you can increase the strength we will repeat from this diagram in the next class there several other benefits and some effects will study. So, we will now summarize what we have looked into we have looked into water reducing agent and some of their some of their aspect we have looked into this we did not look into today in the next class we will look into this we have studied today in fact, what are the and mixtures how do we classify them what are their purpose we have defined them followed by we looked into plasticizers and super plasticizer try to understand their chemistry definition some action mechanism and how they are useful in concrete system will continue with the super plasticizer and hyper plasticizer and plasticizer a little bit including their other effects what do the what happens to the strength what happens to durability and so on so forth they reduce the water for same plasticity, but do they have any effect those aspect will look into then look into other admixtures namely the accelerator, returners etcetera etcetera. Thank you very much. === Lecture 10 Transcript === Welcome to complete technology module 3 lecture 2. We shall be continuing with chemical admixtures. If you recall last class we talked about water reducing agent and then we said you can use the water reducing agent to minimize the cement consumption at a given workability increase the workability at a given level of strength and use the water reducing agent simply to increase the simply to increase the workability alone. So, we continue with that then we shall look into retarders and accelerators, air-entering agent viscosity modifier corrosion inhibitors, water-proofing admixtures and anti shrinkage admixtures. So, continue from the last class if you recall we looked into you know this diagram we showed that we can use it in different way. For example, this is somewhat repeated in a slightly different manner in this diagram in this axis if you see we have water content and then in this axis is flow table stable spread. Now, this is flow table spread flow table spread. So, if you increase the if you use without super plasticizer you want to increase the flow table spread that is the workability you shall be increasing the water content. So, you increase the water content you increase the water content the flow table spread will increase you know increase the water content flow table spread will increase like this this is the curve. But, if you add super plastic but supposing at the same water content you want to get higher flow then simply increase the you know add super plasticizer add super plasticizer. So, with super plasticizer at same water content you can get higher flow. But, supposing you want to maintain the flow same then you can reduce the water and if you want to maintain the same strength you want to maintain the same strength you can reduce down the cement also. So, you can have a cement saving but, you want to get higher strength keep the cement same. So, recall from the previous diagram it is something similar. So, super plasticizer can be used to increase the workability at a given strength without adding any more water you can increase the strength for the same workability by reducing the water content and keeping the same cement same. And, also you can keep the water content same you can reduce down the water you know you can save on cement content by reducing down the water content and raise reducing down the cement as well. So, you can save on cement at the same strength and workability if you like you can get higher strength at same workability or at same strength you can get higher workability. So, this is the way one can use super plasticizer. Well, it is important to look into super plasticizer compatibility that means, it must give the super plasticizing effect the super plasticizer must give the super plasticizing effect. That retardation could be some issues that means, you know depending upon the sugar content of the sugar content of the super plasticizer and at higher dosage it may be pronounced higher dosage it may be pronounced. Of course, it depends upon cement type because, interaction of the cement is very very important it depends upon the cement type. There can be some secondary effects. For example, if you do over dosing this can result in bleeding and setting delay it can result in high bleeding you know lot of excess water might come out of the system and result in bleeding and setting delay can also be there setting delay can also be there. So, one is to look into those know over dosing and write kind of compatibility should be seen. In fact, if you go on increasing the dosage of the super plasticizer beyond a point it will not show any further plasticizing effect. There is a point of diminishing return. So, you the dosage maximum dosage is added such that beyond that if you increase further you will not get any further plasticizing effect. So, that is the maximum and you should not have any kind of negative effect. Water cement ratio less means reduced bleeding will be reduced and you will get strength improvement as well. So, that is right and reduction of water reducing effect due to consumption of SO3 by C3A. This can be an effect for example, sulphinated super plasticizer or plasticizer sulphinated compounds they might react with high C3A cement C3A in case of high C3A cement and water reducing effect may be reduced. So, because it is just you know sulphinated compound if you recall that SO3 gets you know as it is SO3 sulphination was done. So, you will have sodium plus and SO3. So, sodium goes into solution SO3 ensures that it is negatively charged. Your super plasticizer is negatively charged and it can get absorbed. But supposing the SO3 is consumed by C3A excess being present in the cement then reduction of water reducing effect could be there. So, type of cement also matters. Some accelerating effect is seen from super plasticizer because they can disperse the since the disperse the since the disperse the particle since the disperse the particle you can see that with super plasticizer dosage higher the dosage higher the dosage right with higher super plasticizer dosage you have strength. No zero super plasticizer if this was the compressive strength with higher dosage strength early strength increases 12 hour strength 24. But 20 day strength there is of course, much less influence. So, this is because better disperse of the system that is because better disperse of the system. So, it has got somewhat an accelerating effect because hydration will get accelerated more dispersion more particles will come in contact with water and resulting in better this you know better hydration process more uniform hydration product. And that is why you have got somewhat accelerating effect of the super plasticizer. Well, after you know time loss if you see this slump loss or in other words you know if you look at slump retention of water reducing agent. Now, this is important because of in case of ready mix concrete you would like to deliver the concrete after may be certain you know period of time after mixing because it will be there in the agitated track. So, in such situation slump retention is an important parameter or factor that means, it should remain green or you know it should not set. So, setting time of the concrete here is important and supposing you have control this is your control concrete without anything control concrete is this this is your control concrete. So, control concrete is here. So, your slump and this slump became practically 0 after let us say some time say 100 millimetre after mixing 125 minutes or 20 minutes after mixing. Now, you have plasticized one that is this line just plasticized. So, initially it is high obviously, it is retained for also longer period of time. But, if you have a plasticizer come retarder it is still retained for longer period of time. So, it is nearly doubling up the time when slump becomes 0. But, anyway you might be requiring some fixed slump. So, it can retain for longer period of time right retarder with this is with plasticizer. But, if you have super plasticizer so, then slump itself in the beginning is very high and it is retained for longer period of time. Note that slopes in this cases are more or less similar. So, the fact that you have high slump in the beginning right you have high slump in the beginning. So, as the time passes the loss of slump rate is same, but it can retain for longer period of time. So, as a useful thing as far as the ready mixed concrete is concerned you have more time for placing no adverse effect on concrete in any case. So, loss of slump with super plastic size are as we have seen is somewhat lower. Well, hydroxylated carboxylic acid type may increase bleeding in high workability and lignosalphonic ones improves cohesiveness by entraining air. So, these are some secondary effects hydroxylated carboxylic acid type may increase alright may increase bleeding in high workability. This is a polycarboxylic and similar ones bleeding in high workability can be seen in this kind of thing and lignosalphonic acid once may improve the cohesiveness by entraining some amount of air rate of hydration is obviously, likely to increase and long term strength also may be improved long term strength also improve. Low C 3 A low alkalisement usually have more influence low C 3 A and low alkalis cement usually have more influence alright. So, C 3 should be low because as we have seen many cases alkalis and C 3 they can interfere with the super plasticizers action and thus it is better that you have low C 3 A low salchili cement. So, this was what are reducing agents plus the size are super plasticizers and hyper plasticizers. Now, we can come to retarders the another kind of admixtures and we define perhaps the one which will retard the setting and hardening process. Let us see what they are. Essentially, retarders extend the time for the mix to change from plastic to hardened state or you know harden of course, solid state first to solid and then hardened state. So, solid state requires more time typical dosage would be 0.2 to 0.6 percent and examples are molasses sugar gluconates sucrose some phosphates. So, they are the retarders. In fact, sugar is a good example. Supposing your machine is stuck and you are not able to or your you know agitated truck is stuck in traffic and you know that you are not able to reach the site in time and actually it will set by that time by the time you reach because it is a traffic jam or something like that. Well, if you put some retarder like let us say sugar sufficient amount it will never set. So, it is called killing of concrete concrete mix can be killed actually. So, it will never set. So, they are retarders. Temperatures have do have some effect. Temperatures do have some effect on the you know retarding action and this should be seen. This should be seen you know this should be also considered. So, temperature has some effect and shall be accounted higher temperature first reaction takes place retarding action you will yes. These are common in RMC as I said because plasticizer come retarder is usually plasticizer come retarder. These are usually used common in redmixt concrete redmixt concrete RMC stands for redmixt concrete because you want long time you know somewhat longer slump retention because when you want to deliver the concrete at the site the time required may be slightly higher and therefore, you like the slump to be retained and that is why you use retarder come obviously, plasticizer to minimize the water content water required hands even cement you know for the same strength. The retarders the processes involved or the mechanisms if you look at it blocking mechanisms where you know blocking mechanisms where actually at mixtures is adsorbed on the surface strongly on the cement surface and slows down the formation of silicate hydrates. So, that is the thing. So, basically they can be adsorbed on to the cement surface and therefore, formation of silicate hydrates is stopped because they are adsorbed on the surface right and strongly and therefore, slows down the process of formation of silicate. A second mechanism mechanism could be selection by admixtures of calcium ions in solution you know basically calcium ion two organic molecules can form a complex with calcium right with calcium ions. So, the retarders compounds organic compounds in the retarder can from complex with the you know complex with the calcium ion and therefore, prevent precipitation of calcium hydroxide, prevent precipitation of calcium hydroxide, prevent precipitation of calcium hydroxide. So, that is what it is so calcium hydroxide precipitation is prevented now, the calcium hydroxide cannot precipitate therefore, that the reaction cannot go in so, reaction cannot because calcium silicate hydrate formation calcium silicate formation, calcium hydroxide production, you know reaction of calcium has C 3 S and C 2 S forms calcium hydroxide and calcium silicate hydrates. If calcium is not precipitating, this two reaction cannot proceed. So, that could be another mechanism or both. So, both these mechanisms may be at work, but later on it is just retarder without plasticizing effect. First one is with plasticizing effect that is you know coating on top of the surface. So, this coating might also disperse the particle, cement particles while the second case will not have this you know calcium ion forming complex will not have plasticizing effect. Retarding admixtures delay the end of dormant period. You know dormant period we saw it earlier sometime dormant period means the period during which a train jet is largely largely formed. First 30 minutes a train jet is formed right and CHS formation really do not start. So, this essentially ensures that longer a train jet period, longer dormant period and therefore, setting is delayed, setting is delayed and after that setting starts and followed by hardening. Good useful in avoiding cold joints and slip form concrete etcetera etcetera. Slip form construction is continuous construction of vertical members chimney or even buildings, walls and things like that, vertical members right. So, continuous casting can you know casting goes on continuously. Now, cold joint is formed between hardened concrete and fresh concrete because they do not bond well. So, if you have longer setting period and you have put in a layer of concrete and you want to put in the next layer of concrete, if you have a longer setting period you are putting fresh concrete over unset concrete it will ensure that there is no cold joint formation because they will bond better, bond better. So, bonding is better if the setting time is longer. So, you are putting pouring the concrete already unset concrete not set concrete. So, there will be no cold joint formation. Well, that was one class and just similar to this is the accelerator which is another class of admixtures. Now, accelerating admixtures are divided into two groups one is set accelerating another is hardening accelerator set accelerating and hardening accelerator. Now, set accelerating means it will enhance the setting time you know short end the setting time. Hardening accelerator will mean that it will increase the early strength gain. So, set accelerating and hardening accelerator there two varieties. The set accelerator reduce the time of transition from plastic to solid state and extend varying as required extend would be as required how much you want that would as you want. Hardening accelerator enhances the rate of strength gain that is what I just said you know early strength you can get from here. Now, generally dosage varies from 0.5 to 2 percent on cement and usually are inorganic compounds. They are not organic formations inorganic compounds. Calcium chloride used to be one of them it is the most effective accelerator and can act as both set and hardening accelerating and mixture. So, setting as well as hardening process it can accelerate right the calcium chloride. But unfortunately calcium chloride is a problem from the durability of reinforced concrete because it will initiate the rebar corrosion process by what is known as depassivation of the steel. So, usually some kind of passive layer forms over steel which protects the steel. But if calcium chloride is present such passive layers get broken down and it is called depassivation and you know it is not preferred that is why. So, if you have embedded steel in concrete calcium chloride is not the preferred admixture that is that will be used. You know so, in fact is not used any more. Chloride free accelerators are what is preferred these are nitrite sodium or calcium nitrate or nitrite format and thiosynates. So, chloride free accelerators like sodium or calcium nitrite nitrate format and thiosynates are useful in this direction. As we have seen earlier high range water reducing agent has some accelerating effect. Hence are effective with accelerating combination. So, use the accelerator come the super plasticizer. High range water reducing agent this will have an accelerating effect right. They themselves have some accelerating effect and if you use together with an accelerator the benefit is even more it is more effective it is more effective you know it is quite effective. It is quite effective all right. Set accelerator possibly accelerate the formation of a train jide because you see if a train j formation is faster domain period will be reduced. So, set accelerators possibly accelerate the formation of a train jide because we know during the initial phase of setting a train jide is produced during the domain period during the domain period a train jide is produced and it accelerates the setting process. It accelerates the setting process all right. It accelerates the setting process. It is accelerate the setting process all right. It accelerates the setting process. Hardening accelerator increase the rate of dissolution of calcium silicate. Hardening accelerator accelerate the rate of dissolution of calcium silicate and therefore increases CHS formation as RDAH all right. Hardening accelerator accelerate the CHS dissolution of calcium silicate and therefore calcium silicate can react faster and thus RDCHS formation can take place. So, that is how RD strength you can get. High range water reducing agent enhances hydration homogeneity that is what we have seen earlier thus useful in accelerating come water reducing action. So, we have seen that they are good in accelerating come water reducing action all right. Well it would be useful where you want RDD shattering, pre-stressing is required. So, you want to do pre-stress you want to do pre-stress you should it should have sufficient strength gain because pre-stressing can be done. If you want to remove the mold early gain strength gain should be sufficient and then only you should do pre-stressing or remove the mold. So, hardening admixtures are accelerators are useful where RD shattering pre-stressing is desired. So, this was the second variety there are two varieties that we have seen other than water reducing agent. One is the retarding retarders and the second one is the accelerators. Now, the third so third variety is air-entering admixtures largely used in for freeze-thou resistance. We shall be looking at that when we look at durability of concrete largely used in case of freeze-thou to improve the freeze-thou resistance of concrete right freeze-thou resistance of concrete. So, essentially what they how do they act they essentially they you know essentially this once they entrained the air air bubbles into the concrete and this air bubble in turn cause release of hydraulic pressure generated by frost action. We will explain this process in details later on, but at the moment let us understand what this are. So, this admixtures if you put you know controlled quantity of small uniformly it actually puts in makes it actually forms small uniformly distributed air bubble small uniformly distributed air bubbles that is introduced into the concrete during mixing and they remain also they also remain after hardening they remain also after hardening. So, that is what it is so air-entering admixtures they allow for small uniformly distributed air bubbles to be introduced during mixing and remained after hardening. The dosage is usually 0.2 to 0.4 percent on cement dosage is usually 0.2 to 0.4 percent on cement. Well, they do not foul with the performance of dispersing admixtures that is our water reducing admixtures right. Now, may contain only 1 to 5 percent solid does very powerful and let us look at principle how it works. Obviously, if you are introducing pore one issue is that strength would be reduced you know. So, if you introduce pores strength would be reduced reduced strength would be reduced 5 to 6 percent reduction when you have added 1 percent free for each 1 percent of additional air. So, you add one more percent of air 5 to 6 percent reduction in strength will occur mainly as I said used for free resistance free power resistance you know mainly for free power resistance. How does it do it mechanics mechanics I mean mechanism. Well, we will see that but improves cohesion and reduces tendency to bleed that is of course, a little bit of air enternement actually improves the workability that is a side effect basically improves the cohesion within the concrete and tendency to bleed is reduced because it can retain the water more. So, naturally easy compaction easy compaction is possible at lower workability. So, essentially it improves the workability of the mix it increase also the workability of the mix. Intruder stability of any kind of extruded concrete anything extruded through you know extruded or any anything any concrete placed through compressed air, pneumatically placed concrete. So, it improves actually stability of such concrete. Basically, there is surfactants that is the mechanism surfact a surfact a surface acting agents and they are organic compound they are organic compound they are organic compound right as you can see they are organic compounds they have they are two types they are both MP philic and hydrophilic. What is MP philic? MP philic which means that they have got hydrophilic and hydrophilic both hydrophobic tails and hydrophilic heads. What is hydrophobic? Which will push the water away reject the water hydrophilic goes well with the water since their hydrophilic therefore, they are soluble in water and they are also soluble in organic solvents. So, they are MP philic that is hydrophobic and hydrophilic resulting in you know MP philic resulting in hydrophobic and hydrophilic both. So, tail is hydrophilic one tail is you know group's tails are hydrophobic and the head is hydrophilic. So, something attracts it long inner kind of chain on one side they have got molecules which can attract water another side molecules which can reject water. Thus they exhibit hydrophilic water loving and fat loving properties, leaf of philic fat loving properties. So, hydrophobic group some of them show leaf of philic or fat loving properties. So, this is are the two things essentially they reduce the surface tension of water by absorbing at the liquid gas interface. So, they get actually adsorbed at the liquid gas interface that is water air interface all right and change the surface tension properties of the water surface tension properties of the water. In fact, the charged hydrophilic and remains in water and hydrophobic tail traps air bubble. So, therefore, they are at the boundary of water water and air you know interface air the air water interface they would be there in the water side the charged part this remains in contact with water the hydrophobic tail traps air bubble all right. So, at the interface actually in this process they increase the surface tension I mean sorry reduce the surface tension of water and bubble formation becomes easy. So, easy formation of air cavity or bubble as work required to produce unit area of liquid gas interfaces word right. So, easy easy formation of bubbles because easy formation of bubbles as work unit area of work required to produce work required to produce unit area of liquid gas interfaces lord right liquid gas interfaces lord. How much is this work you know in the bubble in a bubble in a bubble the pressure inside pressure inside in a bubble the pressure inside inside pressure must be balanced by the outside pressure inside pressure must be balanced by outside you know that must be balanced and it is actually P in is given as P in is equals to P out outside pressure would be P outside pressure plus twice gamma by r because inside the bubbles there is you know at the interface the the surface tension the water is there water is there at the interface so water is there at the interface this is the air bubble water is there at the interface water is there at the interface so at this you know you can you can show that the pressure here is twice gamma by R. So, P outside is P out plus 2 gamma plus R is equals to P inside otherwise the bubble will collapse. So, bubble should have sufficient pressure inside, P inside must be sufficient, P inside must be sufficient such that it can balance the outside pressure and the pressure due to surface tension forces. The work done would be to increase the surface area by d r. You know it was 4 pi r square, now the area will become 4 pi r plus d r square and which will be 4 pi r square plus 8 pi r d r plus terms involving 4 pi d r square which can be neglected, this can be neglected, this can be neglected and therefore, increase in pressure. So, delta w will be given by d w will be given by this. So, d w is given by this, d w is given by this. So, pressure, so if the surface tension is reduced, less work is required, if surface tension is reduced, less work is required to maintain the surface. In fact, this will also get reduced, therefore, outside pressure, you know, outside P inside pressure is equals to P out. So, this itself will get reduced, the possibility of bubble formation actually increases, possibility of bubble formation increases. So, easy formation of air cavity or bubbles as work required to produce unit area of liquid gas interfaces lower when surface tension is low. Generally, hydrophobic groups are, hydrophobic groups, generally hydrophobic groups, hydrophobic groups is a, generally are fads, oils, petroleum fractions, hydrophilic ones are carboxylates, you know, they are carboxylates, sulfates, sulfonates and phosphates. So, these are the ones, largely salts of wood resins, synthetic detergents, salts of petroleum acids and fatty and reginious acids and they are salts. So, salts, these are the materials, salts of wood resins, synthetic detergents, salts of petroleum acids, etcetera, fatty and reginious acids and they are salts. For example, wind salt resin is obtained from, you know, pine wood. Wind salt resin is an aliphatic hydrocarbon, extracted from pine wood, extracted from pine wood, stumps is, pine wood stumps is the common source of air entering agent. So, it is from the wind salt resin is one which is obtained from pine wood and that is used, that is the common source of air entering agent. So, we said that salts of wood resins, therefore, this is one of the example. So, what we have seen that is air entering agent, which reduces the surface tension, but then we have another variety called viscosity modifier. Now, viscosity modifying agent, viscosity modifying agent, viscosity modifying agent, you know viscosity modifiers are, viscosity modifiers are, water ratings they are used in underwater concreting, anti wash out admixtures, they are essentially anti wash out admixtures, anti wash out admixtures and they have high molecular weight, they soluble polymers. So, cellulose ethers, alginates and polythylene oxides increase the viscosity of water by interacting through hydrogen bonding, cellulose ethers, you know, they are basically something, something like, you know, crudely you can understand something like gum, gum you put in water, it will increase viscosity. So, some of these materials increase the viscosity of water and therefore, then it can hold on water and the cementitious material together more easily. So, therefore, open branch polymer network in water and essentially lock the water, lock the water, lock the water and lock the water and the cement and sand particles reducing viscosity and increasing the cohesion. So, that is the idea, they lock the water cement sand reducing viscosity and increasing cohesion. Dozege may be ranging from 0.1 through 3, 0.3 to 1 percent. So, dozege may range from 0.3 to 1 percent, dozege may range from 0.3 to 1 percent. So, they are viscosity modifiers used in underground, underwater concreting and nowadays in some of the self compacting concrete, some of the self compacting concrete uses this material because when you use polycarboxyl ithere, slightly larger quantity it has a tendency to bleed as we said, can cause bleeding. But, if you if it has got tendency to bleed, one way you can stop is by using a lot of fine metal particles which can hold it together, use of very fine materials which can hold it together. So, very fine you know like cementitious or inert material which can hold it together and that is viscosity or else you can use viscosity modifier which will also block the water cement or cementitious material and sand together. So, bleeding would be reduced that was viscosity modifier. Then we have got corrosion inhibitor, they can stop the corrosion process because you know rebar corrosion is one of the major problem, one of the major durability problem in concrete and corrosion inhibitors stops this corrosion inhibitors stop this corrosion inhibitor stop this. How do they do it? They actually can block anodic or cathodic reactions, example some these are nitrite calcium nitrite, chromates, molyb dates, molyb dates, amino, amino alcohol and blended with inorganic inhibitors. Calcium nitrite, chromates, molyb dates, amino alcohol blended with inorganic inhibitors, they are the ones, they are the examples of they are the examples of corrosion inhibitors. They can act in two different ways, may increase the corrosion threshold. So, the point at which corrosion active corrosion starts they may just increase that, they might delay the starting of corrosion. Nitrites helps in making what is called a passive layer, passive layer most stable. Now, a passive layer is the oxide coating over iron or rebar which protects the steel because steel you cannot you know iron is not a stable compound stable thing, it will get oxidized. But, if it does not get oxidized to at a very fast rate or to a product which is dangerous then it is tolerable. So, dense product at the surface oxide film at the surface of the steel bar is sometimes desirable. So, generally the increase corrosion threshold by making that passive layer stable. So, the oxide layer that is formed oxide layer that is formed over the rebar becomes stable. Nitrite acts that way and less reactive, they are less reactive. So, they have protect the steel protect the steel. So, less reactive by reacting with F e and producing F e 2 O 3. So, they might first react with F e and then allow production F e 2 O 3 thus, anodic sites are protected thus anodic sites are protected. So, these are anodic inhibitors anodic inhibitors actually protect the steel by ensuring that oxides are formed oxides are stable at the surface of the steel. So, that iron does not get dissolved the protective layer protects it. These are called anodic inhibitors. Nitrites essentially does this job, they react maybe with the F e. But, then finally, F e 2 O 3 or such oxides should be forming at the surface of the rebar because it will break down right react with the F e and then producing F e 2 O 3 at the second stage and thus protecting the steel. Opposed to this there are some others which are cathodic inhibitors. Now, dosage are 10 to 20 liters per meter cube of concrete as we can see. Emino alcohol alcohol for example, coars metal surface with a monomolecular layer and also inhibit cathodic reaction hence mixed inhibitors. So, the mixed inhibitor both protects anodic sites and cathodic sites. You know rebar corrosion is an electrochemical process and in the electrochemical process there are some anode in the rebar some cathode in the rebar right. So, the anode if the coating is there on top of the anode it is E F e cannot dissolve at anode F e dissolves at cathode cathodic reaction takes place. Discuss this sometime later on when you talk of rebar corrosion. Now, amino alcohols coat the metal and therefore, inhibits the anodic reaction but also inhibits the cathodic reaction right and hence mixed inhibitor. Now, what is the cathodic reaction? Cathodic reactions are essentially the reaction between oxygen and hydroxide absorbing electron to form hydroxyl ion. So, if you can stop that reaction that is cathodic reaction will be stopped then anodic reaction will automatically stop somewhere in the circuit you have to break it. So, cathodic inhibitor reduce corrosion rate by inhibiting cathodic reaction stop the cathodic reaction of oxygen and water which you know which take electron to form hydroxyl ion. So, sodium hydroxide sodium carbonate ammonium hydroxide increases pH and reduces iron dissolution. So, the increase the pH and reduce because already there are certain amount of hydroxyl ion in the system no further hydroxyl ion can form you know it reduces the dissolution formation of more hydroxyl ion and that is how the product product protected cathodically. First phase carboxylic acid hydrozyne hydrates etcetera hydrohydrous acid is H N 3 is H N 3 is hydrogen and nitrogen hydrogen and nitrogen. So, I think it is NH NH 3 is ammonia this is H N 3. So, that is hydrohydrous acid and hydrozyne hydrate is one of the compound form it. But it has been observed that some may reduce the compressive strength there are some side effect from corrosion inhibitors. So, therefore, they may reduce the compressive strength. So, they have not been not very popular, but still there are some available and then can can protect you know or can can protect the v bar to certain extent right. But they have their own negative effect. So, that has to be remembered. Water proofing admixtures they reduce the capillary adsorption the slur's permeability of hardened concrete. This admixtures when you add to the you know concrete system during mixing in the later stage they act on to the capillary pores in some manner or rather and lowers the permeability of hardened concrete. They can be of this kind like pore blocking treatment you know pore blocking treatment or hydrophobic pore lining treatment. So, pore blocking treatment hydrophobic that is water repelling pore lining treatment. Now, hydrophobic property is essentially because of the contact angle between this material and water you know water and normal surfaces of concrete or many other thing glass let us say it is 0 contact angle is 0. So, water is a wetting liquid for this kind of material surface tension properties. I think we we discussed sometime or we may be discussing sometime later on. So, the surface tension properties just let us quickly can we can have a look at this it will be something like this you see water you put it in water you put water spreads like this. So, the contact angle this angle is 0 this angle is 0. But if you look at mercury mercury on the other hand will be mercury on the other hand will form some sort of bubble this angle is 140 degree with glass. So, therefore, mercury is the non wetting liquid. So, this is this we call as contact angle contact angle. Now, contact angle of water with surfaces contact angle of water with most of the surface is 0 contact angle contact is 0. But if I can make it if the surface changes let us say wax is surface wax on a surface contact angle with water which all changes contact angle of water becomes greater than 90 degree. So, therefore, in a waxes surface you find that water possibly is you know water is possibly not spreading easily not spreading. So, it is forming some sort of a bubble like mercury does in glass. So, therefore, this is this hydrophobic hydrophobic pore lining uses this principle hydrophobic pore lining uses this principle pore blocking is simply blocking the pore dosage may range up to 5 percent. So, this damp proofers are based on fatty acid, oleic, capriolic, steric acid etcetera react with hydration product and block. That means, they will react. So, pore blocking blocking product will react with blocking product will react with substrate mainly the calcium hydroxide mainly the calcium hydroxide and produce CHS like product which can block the pore. So, if this material are added to the concrete they can come at the you know they should be able to migrate to the capillary pores at the surface and react with the substrate itself later on to perform such products which will block the pore. So, fatty acids like oleic, capriolic and steric acid etcetera they react with the hydration product and block. Wax emulsion from hydrophobic pore lining layers, wax emulsion forms hydrophobic pore lining layers and then of course, calcium and aluminum steroids. So, therefore, hybrids to hydrophobic you know pore lining layers. Now, this should do what they when when they are coated onto the capillary surface they come onto the capillary surface the contact angle of water has changed. So, water once to when water is trying to enter when water you know by capillary suction the in place of water by capillary suction becomes then difficult because mercury you cannot like mercury. Mercury you cannot force into you know mercury you just do not go on its own into any pore any capillary you have to force it. So, here also on its own once the surface changes it becomes hydrophobic liquid water cannot penetrate into it you have to force it, but vapor can of course, move. So, these are hydrophobic lining then are varieties of other materials in this line of course, which does the job. But then the generally generally they are two types one is hydrophobic pore lining and another is pore blocking treatment. Then there are shrinkage reducing the at mixtures you see drying of concrete results in lowering of capillary maniscus and since capillary maniscus will lower the stresses introduced due to surface tension surface tension forces you see surface tension forces would would tend to tend to actually introduce a kinds of stress at the capillary boundaries because it is lower you know when the capillary maniscus is lowered. So, this surface tension forces because it was at a at a balanced condition now it has got lowered because some drying has occurred and there will be some surface tension forces that tend to close the capillary and hence shrinkage. So, capillary will try to collapse under this you know surface tension forces. So, shrinkage do occur and then of course gel force will also become empty the water will move out from the gel force subsequently and there could be shrinkage and you know of concrete. So, drying there is a shrinkage of paste and hence the concrete occurs. Now, glycol and other derivatives operate by interpreting the surface chemistry. So, glycol and other some derivatives for example, glycol you know and other derivatives some of its glycol ether derivatives glycol ether derivatives they are operate by interfering with the surface chemistry of air water interface within capillary. Thus reduce the surface tension and consequently reducing effect of shrinkage by stabilizing the capillary. Well, if you look at it air entraining agent also reduces the surface tension, but it has got a head and tail one of them being hydrophobic another being hydrophilic. So, hydrophobic side actually holds on I mean you know hydrophobic side actually is traps the air bubble, but here this will not happen this simply changes the surface tension at the surface tension of the water and you know water air water interface at the air water interface within the capillary and therefore, surface tension is reduced and shrinkage action is reduced. So, that is what it does right it does not have a tail which can enter what you know air. So, no bubble formation could occur, but only surface tension reduction will occur. So, this was shrinkage reducing admixtures then we have got alkali aggregate reaction inhibiting admixtures. Now, alkali aggregate reaction as you know some of the aggregates some of the minerals present in aggregate can react with can react with sodium and potassium hydroxides that would be present in cement water system because sodium oxide and potassium oxides are present in cement right they are there in the cement usually in small quantity and this might form sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide. Now, this once will react with some you know silica mineral forming alkali silica gel and this gel can adsorb water and expand in volume result in cracking of concrete will again deal with this somewhat later on when you talk of durability of concrete, but then there are some inhibitors which can stop this kind of reaction. Of course, you have other means of controlling them, but inhibitors can also be used for example, lithium hydroxide or lithium salts are effective in reducing alkali aggregate reaction because you know sodium lithium potassium they belong to same group they belong to same group in the periodic table. So, lithium replaces sodium and lithium silicates gel you know not it is not gelatineous. So, this does not cause any expansion. So, air entraining agent also reduces the alkali aggregate reaction effects somewhat because because the air boil switch are available the expansion can be taken and mineral admixtures are very effective in this, but mainly the you know like flyers addition in the beginning or or granulated ground blast furnace slacks they are very useful compounds like silent which are silicon and hydrogen compound like as I H 4 or S I N and H 2 N 2 this sort of formula these are called silence. So, silent compounds and siloxens are composed of units from R 2 S I O where R is the hydrogen atom or hydro carbon. So, R 2 S I O H 2 S I O to any other you know CH 3 etcetera. So, these are siloxens. So, silent and siloxens materials then silico flow rights together with this one silico flow rights are the other material they are found to be effective in reducing alkali aggregate reaction. In fact, silo silo silin and siloxens are used in water repelling system as well water proofing system as well we might look into this sometime in connection with surface coating and durability of concrete. So, but silico flow rights together with silence and silox N also are found to be effective in alkali producing alkali aggregate reaction. Calcium phosphate prior to use of use also reduce if you use calcium phosphate with the aggregate prior to their use this also reduces the alkali aggregate reaction expansion. As I told you lithium reaction with alkali silicate to produce in soluble lithium silicate. So, this does not form gel and therefore, lower expansion and they also provide with high valency cations to neutralize the osmotic pressure because the pressure which causes cracking has something to do is you know is osmotic pressure in the system we will discuss about that sometime. So, lithium in a second way it it it axis it provides with high valency cations to neutralize osmotic pressure. So, that is how alkali aggregate reaction you know can be controlled by use of this kind of inhibiting admixtures alkali aggregate reaction inhibiting admixtures silico flow rights silin siloxens water repellent as I told you they are also water repellent and allows air entanglement hence able to reduce swelling due to water ingress and gel formation. So, they are used in water repellent as I told you water proofing system calcium phosphate interferes with the dissolution process of silica and gel formation. These are some other material used for alkali aggregate reaction inhibitors. Some lithium salt but reduces the strength silin etcetera has no such negative effects they are reduces uses water reducing agent as well as can inhibit the and there is another another side of it since they can reduce the water ingress water ingress is a must for alkali aggregate reaction. So, that is another effect of silin silico flow rights and siloxens. I think that is what finishes our discussion on chemical admixtures. So, in total what we have seen is we have seen actually water reducing admixtures which in more detail than any other admixtures because they are in the last two lectures actually we have seen because they are the one 60 percent of the admixtures are these ones they are the most common one. Then follows accelerator retarders and we also looked into air entraining agents corrosion inhibitors shrinkage reducing admixtures and alkali aggregate reaction inhibitors etcetera. So, I think with this we just finish our discussion on chemical admixtures in the next lecture we will look into mineral admixtures. Thank you very much. === Lecture 11 Transcript === Now, we shall be looking into mineral lab mixtures. So, model 3 lecture 3 deals with mineral lab mixtures. So, general outline of our discussion would be something like fly ash, silica fume, ground granulated blast furnace lag, risers cashe etcetera. These are all mineral lab mixtures, their production, characterization and some features of the mineral lab mixtures. So, that is what we will look into this lecture 3. Now, let us see what is fly ash. Coal is mind from mother earth and it contains layers impurity. Now, you see thermal power plant burns this coal to produce energy, which is used to generate steam and finally, to run the steam turbine to generate electricity. The fly ash obtained from thermal power plant, actually fly ash is obtained from thermal power plant, because this coal is burnt and it contains clay. So, when coal is grinded burned to produce energy at about 1800 degree centigrade, the residue left after burning is fly ash. The residue left after burning is fly ash. In other words, it has something to do with the clay itself. Now, this is collected either in dry or in a slurry form. So, collected dry or in some sort of slurry form and a small portion of this ash as we call it goes down, which we call as bottom ash. In fact, the ash that is generated, there is a clay, which is heated up together with the coal produces this ash, which flies away. And some portion of the ash goes to the bottom of the furnace that we call as bottom ash. So, we have fly ash and bottom ash. Fly ash generally goes above, collected through the chimney, collected through electrostatic precipitators and then bottom ash remains at the bottom. So, let us see the process, the coal, which is actually pulverized or made into fine powders. Then, there is a combustion occurs in furnaces. From the combustion, the flow gases will go through the chimney and this is actually, this goes through what is called electrostatic precipitators, because fly ash being fine particle, they would have otherwise gone to the atmosphere, but generally considered as hazard from environmental point of view, health point of view. So, you do not want fly ash to go to the atmosphere and deposit in neighborhoods or elsewhere. It is kind of fly fine dust, very fine particle. So, now, desirable that they get spreaded everywhere. Therefore, they are collected in the chimney itself using what is called electrostatic precipitators. They are nothing but electrically charged plates, through which the flow gases passes. And since this fine particle forming colloidal solution in the air is colloidal solution in the air, since these are colloidal solution in the air, they are charged particles. So, this charged particles essentially when they come across those electrostatic precipitators, which have electrically charged plate, actually precipitated and they are then collected, then they are collected. So, they are collected in electrostatic precipitators and followed by electrostatic precipitators followed by fly ash production, these fly ash can be handled dry or wet process can be handled wet. So, in wet process what you do, you actually mix up this ash with water and usually with the bottom ash, usually with the bottom ash form into a slurry and this slurry is transported and stored in a pond. In case of dry process, they are handled dry and taken directly to the silo, wet process put it into the pond, wet process put it into the pond. So, this is how fly ash is produced, this is how fly ash is produced, it comes from the mother earth along with the coal, the coal gets burned into carbon dioxide etcetera etcetera. But the silica or the clay particles, they form by ash. So, that is what it is, that is the fire. Now, this shows the fly ash production again, you see this is the coal bunker, this is not cool, this is coal bunker actually, coal bunker, this is coal bunker, coal bunker from where it comes to the pulverizer, pulverizer, this is coal pipe pulverizer, COAL not C W L, coal pulverizer and then from this pulverized coal is put it into the burning process or furnace, where from the flow gases will generate, air compressed air is also passed in through this, you know this is put into the burner and this burner would pass through the electrostatic, you know one gases will pass through the electrostatic precipitators and finally, the ash is collected, from electrostatic precipitators, this ash is collected, they if they are handled dry, they will go to the fly ash hopper and if they are handled wet, they will go to the lagoon or the pond mixed up with possibly bottom ash. So, this is what is fly ash production, schematically if we look at it again to understand the fly ash as material, you see pulverized, this is you know this is first of all, this is the, you know this is this is the, this is basically the trucks or rail or roads, basically production from the power station, this is the precipitators and from the precipitators, some of them might go to disposal, some might be stored in raw pulverized fuel ash bunker, PFA stands for pulverized fuel ash bunker and then they can be transported somewhere, so this is from the chimney the flue gas through the precipitator, this is the fly ash ash are collected and transported and then you can put it into a classifier. So, therefore, if you put it into a classifier, sizes different size fraction can be separated, some may straight to be taken to the storage silos and may be transported through road tanker to various kind of processes and here the oversized ones can be collected, so you can process the fly ash somewhat, whatever fly ash you get from the chimney, electrostatic precipitators they can be directly stored somewhere in silos or they can be passed to a classifier, where the large oversized or large sized ones are separated out, fine ones are take a handle separately stored in a possibly silo and then of course, transported by raid road or rail or whatever is required. So, this is how fly ash is produced in handle, if you look at the next one another of mineral admixture material, it is silica fume, so fly ash is one of the mineral admixtures silica fume is another mineral admixtures. Now, silica fume is produced in silicon industry, basically you see silicon and ferro silicon alloys in their production uses high purity quartz and this is reduced with coal or coke and wood chips basically with carbon this is reduced to produce Si, so these are reduced actually in electric arc furnace at around 2000 degree centigrade to produce silicon metal or ferro silicon alloys, the semiconductor industry uses this material silicon and ferro silicon, so whichever industry uses silicon and ferro silicon in their production essentially quartz is reduced that is SiO 2 would be reduced to Si and in presence of you know using carbon or coke or coal or whatever it is in electric arc furnace. Now, in this process some gases escapes and this gases escaping from the furnace when condensed contains ferricle particles of amorphous SiO 2 in very high concentration and this concentration is in the process of course depends upon the alloy type, for example if you have 50 percent ferro silicon then you will have SiO 2 content in the condensed silica 60 to 85, 84 percent for 75 percent ferro silicon this will be 84 to 91 percent and for silicon metal 98 percent pure you will 90 percent of silica content in the condensed silica fume. So, this condensed silica fume is reach in silica it is reach in silica and that is how it is produced that is how it is produced all right. So, this that is how it is produced the schematic diagram would look like this where A is the open furnace B is the stack C is the pre collector and D of course, is a fan E is the bag house and filter. So, open furnace from where this stack the gases goes some of it is collected condense silica fume comes this way the fume goes out and the condense silica fume comes this way it is collected pre collector is here after that through the fan this is you know actually collected bag house and filters that is how it is collected. So, silica fume is other mineral add mixture fly ash is one of them silica fume is other than then we have got granulated blast ground blast furnace slag. Now, the two materials are the two extremes fly ash almost you get you know it is actually if you do not collected it is almost an environmental hazard and therefore, this is you know available practically free of cost with transportation cost because the thermal power plant or the power industry finds it difficult to dispose it of is generally an environmental concern. So, therefore, the power industry would like that as much of as much of is it is utilized elsewhere and they do not have to point because you cannot go on ponding or making what is called mounts out of them in either case you need land and you cannot go on acquiring the land again and again. So, for them disposal is a problem therefore, it is available practically free of cost whereas condense silica fume it is not produced in all the countries and therefore, it is produced only in some limited countries needs not much processing only little bit of processing in terms of condensation etcetera, but its cost is generally high in many countries in India of course, it is about 7 to 8 times costlier mostly it is you know often it is costlier 7 to 8 times than the that of cement fly ash on the other hand is practically available free of cost with transportation cost. These materials they have a commonalities all contains silica which can react right all you know they are common aspect of this material is all come from lime silica alumina system they have silica and alumina. Second aspect common to this materials are they are grinded to fine and then heated to high temperature you know 1200 to 2000 degree centigrade and they are rapidly cooled both silica fume as well as fly ash. Now, due to this rapid cooling some chemical energy remains locked up as chemical potential some chemical energy remains locked up therefore, the chemical potential is higher than original parent material both this cases is in case of fly ash the coal has been heated and in case of quartz in case of silica fume quartz also has been heated both are both are heated contain silica and some alumina of course, alumina in case of fly ash in case of silica fume these are other materials are very less it is usually the silica SiO 2 content is very high. So, both have been heated and then cooled rapidly so that it could not reach to is naturally stable state they are generally not crystalline they are largely amorphous and they can react in a conducive condition right. Sometimes the clay impurity may contain a little bit of fly also in case of fly ash so that is why lime silica alumina system they all belong to lime silica alumina system. Therefore, this are as I said they are relatively unstable because they are heated and then cooled rapidly. So, oxides that are present would be SiO 2 Al 2 O 3 and then the liquid some cases a little bit of calcium oxide and some other cases it will be more right. For example, in this case of course, it is high but I have not come to the production of this as yet. So, this this case is calcium oxide is high and some fly ash has got high lime content. So, the oxides are similar all almost similar as the cement clinker ordinary Portland cement clinker, but the proportions are different this class of materials we call as Pozolina that is why the title Pozolina we are seeing and I will just explain what Pozolina is little bit later. Oxide content of course, varies from material to material that means SiO 2 content in case of silica film is very high it is not so high in case of fly ash and even still less in granulated ground blast furnace slag. Rice has cast course it is again high we shall see that later on. Now, Pozolina material has the characteristics that they contain reactive silica as I said because the silica which has been heated up and cooled rapidly is in amorphous relatively unstable form and can react with lime in presence of water to yield same product as cement hydration. We have seen when cement reacts with water C 3 S and C 2 S reacts with water plus water you know they gives rise to C H S. Now, lime is in the case of ordinary Portland cement clinker lime and silica are mixed together they are heated calcine to obtain the OPC clinker, but here reactive silica and reactive lime you take mix them together in presence of water they will be reacting and they produce the same sort of product C H S. So, this reaction reaction of lime with silica in presence of water is called Pozolonic reaction. So, the material which exhibit Pozolonic reaction we call them as Pozolona. Many most of the mineral not many most of the mineral admixtures which you use in concrete are basically Pozolonic in Pozolonic in nature. If you see the energy cement kilo joules per kg in case of cement it is 372 lime if you want to produce it will consume 173 kilo joules per kg fly ash none hydrated lung 1.42 and burnt clay Pozolona because you can burnt clay for example, Metacabalene when you take all in at Calon clay and calcine or heated up to about 780 degree 800 degree centigrade cool it rapidly you get burnt clay Pozolona or surki is also burnt clay Pozolona obtained from brick in you know when you making brick we have clay which we mold into bricks and when you heat up the fine powders as a dust which comes down at the bottom of the kiln it is nothing but clay heated up to 12 1300 degree centigrade and cooled rapidly surki is also a Pozolona surki as we call it. So, surki could be one of them this once and this one has also some energy required to produce rice ash cash about 12 kg per you know surki is already shown here 12. So, they need much less then it much less actually. So, this produces so, energy least energy is consumed in the use of production is fly ash cement of course, uses maximum right. Generated blast furnace slag has got some at higher value some silica fume of course, we will have some slightly more than this. So, energy used is this right now let me just explain before I go to this let me just explain before characterisation let me just explain how do you get ground granulated blast furnace slag you see generally iron ore contains iron ore contains iron ore contains clay as impurity. So, to remove the clay lime is added lime is added this lime forms the this lime forms the clay lime is added this lime forms the this lime forms the slag this lime forms the slag so lime is added so now lime forms lime forms slag you know lime forms slag together with slag lime forms slag lime clay and lime forms slag which normally is added so you know the lime forms slag lime forms slag lime forms slag lime clay and lime forms slag which normally floats over molten iron and collected in the same form slag lime forms slag which normally floats over molten iron and collected in the same form slag which normally floats granulated and grinded granulated and grinded to obtain ggvfs ground granulated blast furnace slab. Rice hash cash is obtained from rice hash burning rice hash and slightly burning rice hash and slightly processing the same, slightly processing the same. So, all these materials they are obtained by burning some sort of silica alumina system at high temperature and rapidly cooling them rapidly, quickly, quickly, quickly, characterization of this materials. You have physical characteristics, first thing we look at grain size distribution, particle size distribution, fineness and also specific gravity. Now, grain size distribution is important because if you have more of the fine materials, if the particle sizes are finer, they can react at faster rate. Therefore, fineness distribution is one thing and overall fineness is also an important aspect. So, fineness finer the material is it will react more. Specific gravity is important because that will tell us how much volume to the occupy. Then we have chemical composition, we look at oxide compositions, oxide compositions like SiO2 content Fe2O3. So, silica, iron oxide, ferric oxide, aluminum oxide, lime and calcally magnesium oxide, SO3 etcetera, etcetera. Lawson ignition is an important issue, Lawson ignition is an important issue. This is determined by heating it up to 1000 degree centigrade, 1000 degree centigrade and for keep it for half an hour, for half an hour, for half an hour, keep it for heat it up to 1000 degree plus 50 degree centigrade around that temperature, keep it for half an hour. What will happen? All the unburnt carbon if present will actually get converted into carbon dioxide and go away but there will be some amount of moisture loss also. Any unoxidized material may also get oxidized. So, there will be net change of mass. Obviously, it will be usually, you know usually the loss because carbon unburnt carbon depending upon of course, unburnt carbon. So, Lawson ignition actually is a measure of how much carbonicious material unburnt carbon is available and this is an important parameter because more of it makes it detrimental for use in cement waste material or concrete system. So, chemical composition we look at this two important thing, mineralogical characterization largely this material should be amorphous but there are some amount of minerals present of course, then you know the percentage of amorphous material is most important more of it better it is. But still we look at the mineralogical composition if there is any whatever the minerals present there right we might look into by x-ray diffraction. Then of course, mechanical characteristics that is most important. So, you look into mechanical characteristics that is something like how mechanical characteristics are something like how how much strength potential they have with cement let us say all with line. So, these are some mechanical characterization we look into some of them. So, let us see physical characteristics this is of course, in Indian scenario the code that is available is IS 1727 1967 and following properties we can test. Fineness is measured by what is called blaine's permeability method. I think we discussed this when we are talking of cement you know fineness of cement is also measured by blaine's permeability method and if you recall we have a standard packing of the particular system with a given porosity and we achieve this with a plunger and in a given container. We pack it fixed mass of the material and pack it in a given manner. So, that we get nearly same porosity and then we measure what is called air permeability. In other words for a constant head drop the time required you know flow for the flow how much is the time required for a constant head drop that we find out and from this time we can find out specific surface specific surface is related to the air permeability. So, you can find out the specific surface and there is formula available. So, blaine's fineness gives us basically specific surface in terms of like cement you know meter square per kg or centimeter square per gram etcetera etcetera. So, fineness is measured by this we measure soundness like we do for cement is there any volume changes said with certain reaction lime reactivity is an important test whereby we measure in fact the pozzolane city. So, what we do is we make cubes with lime, pozzolane and sand. These cubes are prepared in a standard manners 5 centimeter by 5 centimeter by 5 centimeter cube they are prepared in a standard manner basically the amount of water is fixed from the flow requirement. So, you have a fixed flow for the how much is the water to be added that is found out the proportions used are 1 is 2 m. So, 1 stands for the lime of the particular grade specified in the code analytical reagent grade 2 m is m stands for the ratio specific gravity of lime to the pozzolona lime to the pozzolona and then 9 standard sand. So, everything else is standardized except for the pozzolona and then you produce the cube in a standard manner by mixing in a standard manner in a water mixer and also making the cube in a standard manner curing them in a standard manner first 48 hours just under cover the glass and most you know most close those something like that and then in a relative given relative humidity standardized relative humidity for 8 days and then test it for compressive strength in a machine compression testing machine at fixed rate of loading. If you get the sufficient strength then it is acceptable at the specified strength of the cube is given and that is what we call as lime reactivity value is expressed in m p a and if you get appropriate or minimum value of specified strength you can use it in either in cement or in concrete etcetera etcetera. So, this is called lime reactivity test then we have got compressive strength of flyers cement mortar similar test but this time we have cement not lime and flyers but instead cement flyers flyers in standard proportion with cement mortar then drying shrinkage of flyers cement mortar not very important or common specific gravity can be measured by leachetyleous bottle like we normally do for cement. So, same instruments are used practically and also you can find out particle size distribution by hydrometer analysis right. So, using stokes law which is done for soil or also you can use particle size distribution by any other modern methods like x ray diffraction time of transition laser time of transition etcetera etcetera. But in any case one must understand that the particle size determined by one method is not comparable to that determined by another method. So, they are essentially comparative tool to find out fineness and particle size distribution. So, if you look at the physical characteristics of some of those puzzle owner then we will see that flyers mean size is 10 to 15 micron now there are two types of flyers F and C. I think I will come to that later on see one thing at the moment we can remember is that type C flyers got can have more lime up to 40 percent whereas type F flyers has got less lime in it not more than 10 percent. And this classification is based on American society of testing material S T M classification of C and M. Rysask as if you look at it it has got mean size 10 to 20 micron mean size 10 to 20 micron and silica fume 0.12 0.3 very fine very fine very fine very fine meta kaolin which I said was a kalsine clay kaolin clay is heated up kalsine to 700 or 800 degree centigrade and then rapidly cooled they can have a size of 1 to 2 and micron. So, these are all in micron. So, this is in micrometer mean size you can see the finest one is the silica fume and the coarsest one would be possibly Rysask as or you know flyers. Blaine's specific surface if you look at it if it is in meter square per gram right meter square per gram. So, if I write it in centimeter square per gram that would be simply multiplied by meter square to send 100 into you know 100 meter square per kg would be how much kg would be 1000 times multiplied right values yeah the values seems to be ok. It is of the order of around 1500 centimeter square per gram. So, 1.5 so, this centimeter square means 10 to the power 4 I think this is this is not correct this should be multiplied by a factor of you know this should be this divided by 10 there is some problem I think the figure is problem it should be 1500 centimeter square to about 3000 centimeter square per gram whereas, this is much higher. So, similar scale it should increase this this is not correct this is not correct actually the unit would be meter square, but relative values I think are same. So, this should be meter square per gram would have been per gram would have been then there is a multiplication of 10 factor. So, this will be this is not relative scales are same relative scales are same you can see that silica fume has got actually 15000 to 25000 centimeter square per gram. So, this is much higher Meta kaolin is also higher and rice has gas is still higher G G B F S is not so high it is comparable to type C type F flashe flyers. So, specific surface is much higher in case of silica fume even Meta kaolin and rice has gas whereas, flyers has got low specific surface because particle sizes here are large mean compared to this mean particle size large, but there is reason why this is this has got very large surface area because this has got a cellular structure cell like structure you know structure will be cell like something like this cellular structure I think I have some diagram whereas, these are spherical particles G G B F S is ground grinded. So, therefore, their angular in nature ground granulated blast furnace slag so, therefore, their angular in nature this is against spherical and this is a plaity. So, shape wise if you see this cellular that is why this shows shows much higher. Now, this is this is you know that is why that shows that is very high that is show very high specific gravity of the similar range except for G G B F S which has got lime more lime than any other material and all other say around 2 close to 2 or 2.2 2.25 2.4 etcetera 2.4 etcetera right. So, this should be if it is milligram then how much it is anyway this relative scale is fine. So, meter square meter square meter square per kg is around 150. So, meter square gram would be this should be multiplied meter square per gram would be much less. So, divided by 1000 so, 0.15 and if I multiply this by 10. So, this should be senti milli senti gram maybe senti gram C G. So, meter square per centi gram would be something like this. So, anyway relative scales are fine what we understand is what we understand is this has got pretty high value of brain fineness this has got somewhat much less and this has got higher because of its cellular structure. So, silica fuse the finest of all this material. Now, if you look at scanning electron micro graph of this one of fly ash will actually see spherical particles the white ones are spherical particles you know these are spherical particles of the fly ash. So, generally they show spherical particles sphericity you know type C or type F fly ash both fly ash as are spherical in nature as you can see here like it is something like this rounded shape these are all rounded shape. So, this is this is rounded shape actually as you can see here right rounded shape. So, silica you know fly ash particles are rounded in shape scanning electron micro graph if you make them into solid by bonding with epoxy or something and look into the shape pond a dash of course, is the one which was collected wet and this also has got spherical shape, but then there will be mix up of larger size particle. So, all look actually they have spherical shape and there is something called pleiro sphere of type F fly ash you know there are larger sphere in pond a dash which will if you break it and you will find finer spheres are within them. There are some hollow spheres which we call a synosphere. So, fly ash particles is something like this you know if you look at it they are all rounded. So, they look rounded. So, actually they ensure that you know the shape that we have talked about they are valid and so is the silica fume you can see that they are all black ones are the silica fume they are rounded shape they are rounded shape micro silica as it is called these are rounded shape. So, these are also rounded shape. So, scaling electron micro graph shows that they are rounded shape fly ash as well as this now rise as cash if you see they turn out to be cellular in nature you know there are cells. So, this is this is not rounded shape anymore, but you can see the cells cell sort of structure cellular structure that is becomes visible and that will depend upon at what temperature they have been actually burned 700 to 800 degree centigrade this is 500 to 600 degree centigrade. So, depending upon the temperature you find that they are their nature differs slightly and at higher temperature this shows the cellular structure of this material they are cell like you can see these are holes in between the solid phases. So, they are cellular in structure and that is why their surface area was very large or the particle sizes are not very large. If we look at the particle size distribution the mass smaller than this size 100 micron and this is 0.01 micron see fly ash is here there are you know as I said see fly ash got lime and class fly ash will not have class f fly ash will not have lime. So, they have size very close to the cement ordinary Portland cement varying from 100 to 1 micron right 100 percent passes to 100 micron and so is the case of cement Kelsain clay is somewhere there relatively fine and silica few is the finest because almost everything is smaller than let us say 0.3 micron or so. So, size wise we understand that this materials finest silica fume and the courses should be fly ash metacallion will be somewhere in between right. Rice hash case of course, is cellular in structure the mineral logical composition one looks at quartz, mu light magnetite, hematite and glassy phases because this is most important. So, these are the kind of minerals which are present and one can obtain them from excel deflection study. For example, this is for you know this is for fly ash as you can see that quartz is present, mu light is present, hematite and magnetite is present. So, q stands for quads in excel deflection what you do it can find out the crystal you know it can find out the crystal because from angle at which the x-rays incident two theta where deflection occurs from you know the crystal planes that is actually recorded and this is mu light peak this is quartz peak. So, you get quartz mu light these are the material which are present in fly ash, fly ash ash. So, there is a comparison of all of them low calcium fly ash you see quartzite, mu light etcetera high calcium fly ash again quartzite quartzite peak etcetera, but granulated blast furnace like you do not get that many peak except here, but it is something like this. So, it is largely amorphous and you can see this band which actually explain where you have got amorphous material. So, amorphous material you know large quantity of amorphous material is somewhere here. So, these are typically the mineralogical compositions or mineralogical you know excel deflection results of fly ash and ggbfs more amorphous material in ggbfs compared to fly ash which has got some crystalline material right this is shown in slightly more details low calcium fly ash and high calcium fly ash and ggbfs. So, classification now I can talk about the classification of fly ash there are two types there are many ways of classifying but ash tm classification is based on the lime content there are other ways of classifying, but most commonly adopted classification is based on lime content and that same ash tm classification. So, you have two classes one is class f and class c and that is what it is. So, class f or type f or type c now type c f comes from anthocite or sub betouminous coal and they have low calcium oxide that is the definition type c comes from lignite or betouminous coal and they have got high calcium oxide there are several other classification based on carbon content etcetera, but this is the main classification in fact in India not then India mostly you get this fly ash somewhere in the south western region you get type c fly ash wherever you get lignite coal it results in burning of the lignite coal results in class c fly ash. Let us look at chemical composition of all this puzzle on us type c fly ash you will have silica 25 to 50 percent, but you will have calcium oxide 10 to 40 percent that is what by definition type f fly ash of course, you will have 30 percent if I have to 60, but this will be less. Generated ground granulated blast furnace sacks you have got silica 20 to 40. So, this has reduced actually, but this has increased lime has increased because as I said the blast furnace slag is obtained by adding lime to the iron ore for removal of clay. So, when you want to remove the clay you add lime now this two together forms a slag you know clay is removed by the lime and forms a kind of slag which is again at very high temperature same like other puzzle on us, but it has got large quantity of lime compared to fly ash even type c fly ash you will find more lime in ground granulated blast furnace slag. So, it has got more lime because lime has been added now this slags usually floats over the molten iron. So, iron is drained out from the bottom and slag slag is taken out from the top it is in molten state then it is granulated etcetera. So, therefore, it will have higher lime because that was added and to remove the clay and you have 30 to 50 percent of the lime, but then silica is less. Aluminum oxide is 5 to 35 and use silica few bit slightly it has got all silica you know SiO 2 large amount of SiO 2 everything else is much less. This is small aluminum is small iron oxide is small calcium oxide is small glass content is very high in this about 95 percent whereas, this has got 80 percent, but this has got less as we could see from excelery fraction diagram that this has got large lime area under that curve is much wide you know the bottom bottom portion of the curve and picks where there are much less peaks in this. This has got about 25 percent amorphous material this has got about 10 percent to 40 percent and 10 percent and 40 percent and if you check it up in type F flyers you have got alumina here this alumina gets reduced because this is in phase iron oxide is 2 to 25 calcium oxide is low, but here calcium oxide is high this particles are spherical this is sharp that is because you have grinded it. So, ground something which is ground material cannot be spherical because after grinding it will be angular in nature and this is again spherical this is again spherical. So, these are the chemical characteristics of this now IS 38 Indian standard 3812 give specification of flyers it gives you specification of flyers 3812 gives you specification of flyers and tells you what should be the chemical composition preferred chemical composition desired chemical composition of this material. Puzzle unique activity index is one of the index right like lime reactivity is in a we have Puzzle unique activity it shows because we tested cubes and the strength is measured and that lime reactivity tells us about the strength potential of the Puzzle owner if you mix with lime. So, that is in a way kind of some sort of Puzzle unique activity index I mean Puzzle unique indicator of Puzzle unique activity, but Puzzle unique activity index is defined in a specific manner it is a amount of cement that can be replaced by unit weight of flyers without altering the compressive strength at any age. So, let us say replace 20 percent C by F in mortar samples which standard sand. So, you know it is the amount of cement that can be replaced by unit weight of flyers without altering the compressive strength at any age that is how we define it right. So, let us say 20 percent cement can be replaced by flyers without altering the strength then this is what is the Puzzle unique activity index will be this it is found out as A by B divided by 100 where average strength of the test cubes and B is the average strength of control cubes. So, strength should be similar what is the flyers how much percentage of flyers you can add that you can find out, but in any case it should not be less than 75 percent A by B less than 75 percent. Lime reactivity test I have mentioned you know I have mentioned is 5 centimeter side mortar 1 is to 2 m is to 9 m is the specific gravity of Puzzle unique divided by specific gravity of lime that is m and 2 is the standard sand compressive strength at 10 days 2 day before demolding and 8 days at 60 degree centigrade and relative humidity 90 percent quantity of water is used to maintain a fixed flow of 110 plus minus 5 percent flow and then find out the strength after 10 days if it is less than 4 if it is minimum is you know it should be 4 m P A and 5 m P A for used in I think 5 m P A should be used in cement or concrete 4 m P A for non structural work etcetera etcetera. So, this minimum value is specified the cube strength should come 4 m P A at after 10 days. So, you test the with lime the Puzzle Lona and standard test you perform and it must give you a minimum strength specified by the code minimum is 4 to 5 m P A 5 centimeter side mortar that is we have seen and blames fineness is the other important aspect. So, therefore, what we have seen so far? What we have seen so far? We have seen what are the Puzzle unique materials? What are Puzzle unique materials? Puzzle unique materials? Puzzle unique material from definition they are from definition they are the one which reacts with lime in presence of water lime water plus P would produce CHS. In fact, there is a little bit of history which I did not mention the name Puzzle Lona is derived from volcanic ash actually volcanic ash if you look at it they of course, are not naturally available everywhere, but available somewhere this volcanic ash particularly in Italy volcanic ash when you mix it lime and water could give rise to production of cementing material that is CHS. So, that that ash was collected by the Puzzle Lona and from that one from that one the name Puzzle Lona has come into that name Puzzle Lona has come into practice name Puzzle Lona has been derived from those volcanic ash ash. So, all the materials which react with lime in presence of water to produce CHS product they are called Puzzle Lona. They are used from you know quite Roman emperors a 2000 years back they have been used in fact lime has been used for over 7000 years that is what I think I must have mentioned in the very first day when I talked about the history of concrete system. So, Puzzle Lona 2000 years back in India of course, Sourke has been used in many monuments. So, this use of this material in you know water or machinery has been there for very long time. Now, these materials are used as mineral admixtures in concrete. So, that is what we have discussed what is Puzzle Lona we have defined and then we try to classify them we try to classify them or name them in terms like flyers granulated blast furnace slag some main ones metacallion, rhizus cache and silica fume. And we have seen the extreme and silica fume is the finest of them most reactive contains maximum amorphous material and amorphous silica. And on the other hand in Indian city of course, it will be the cost based of all of them. On the other hand flyers is the cheapest one, but its size is larger it has got minimum specific surface and but it is available free of cost. So, therefore, these materials can be used in concrete as mineral admixtures. So, we looked into their first of all we looked into what they are how they are produced and then their physical characteristics chemical characteristics and mineralogical characteristics finally, some mechanical properties finally, some mechanical properties. So, I think with this we can you know we can we can conclude our discussion on mineral admixtures. Next class we will next class we will continue with the mineral admixtures they are effect on fresh concrete and they are effect on durability and other issues. So, first we will look into fresh concrete then they are effect on hardened concrete and lastly we will look into their effect on durability. So, I think we will conclude with this thank you very much for hearing. === Lecture 12 Transcript === Welcome to module number 3 lecture 5. We will continue with the mineral admixtures and we ended up in the last class action of water reducing agent on mineral admixtures. So, we will look at it again, repeat it a little bit and we will talk about bleeding, mechanical performance with mineral admixtures, creep and shrinkage and durability. So, if you look at action of super plasticizers A is a case with no super plasticizers. So, you will have particle of the cement or cementitious material, cement material not cementitious, only cement material if you have, they would be something like the clogged and with large voids inside. But when you add for example, super plasticizer they get dispersed pushed apart and this clogged scenario will not be there, they will be something like this you know at contact points they will be pushed apart, but there is a contact point. But if you add let us say very fine mineral admixtures together with the super plasticizer, then you get the voids spills spaced, these voids get filled up, these voids, these are the particulate, these voids gets filled up by the mineral admixture themselves. So, therefore, they give you a much better structure. So, no super plasticizers scenario is this high range water reducing agent that is sulfonated malamine condensates or sulfonated naphthalene condensates or PC gives you something like this, but when you have high range water reducing agent plus silica fume you get something like this. So, therefore, they are much better more dense structure and uniform and cement particles are well dispersed and that is what we saw in the last class, that is what we saw in the last class. So, without the plasticizers they are all agglomerated, cement grains are agglomerated, well these are idealized diagrams, cement grains are never spherical in nature with the super plasticizers, they are dispersed and with micro filler they are well dispersed together with the micro filler is nothing but the mineral admixtures and they have a uniform and dense structure compared to this, dense because the mineral admixture has gone in between and that is how it gives you a much better microstructure. As we said super plasticizers demand last class we are mentioning at the end that super plasticizers demand is unaffected by fly ash, it does not change, it does not increase the super plasticizer demand. If anything it does it will reduce the requirement a little bit, it will reduce the requirement a little bit because fly ash themselves has got some amount of plasticizing effect, they can reduce, they have some amount of water reducing you know action. So, this increases with silica fume, super plasticizer demand will increase with silica fume, that is because silica fume is largely silica fume is very fine, that is because silica fume is very fine, that is what we have looked into in the last class that they are very fine and therefore, they cause a little bit of increase with the super plasticizer demand because they get adsorbed with the surface of the fine particle. So, since silica fume is fine it can adsorb and lot of it can adsorb a lot of the super plasticizer at their surface because they themselves also guest get pushed apart by the super plasticizers. So, the since their surface area is large they can consume more amount of super plasticizer, they can consume more amount of super plasticizer. Larger specific surface would demand more dosage of high range water reducing agent, more demand you know they will larger specific surface would demand more dosage of high range water reducing agent. Rice husk ash requires high dosage as we mentioned earlier, rice husk ash requires very high dosage because specific surface is very large that is because of their cellular structure they consume much more super plasticizer because their specific surface is very very high much higher than even silica fume although the you know structure is somewhat different. Physical structure is cellular rather than you know spherical or something of that kind. So, as a result surface area is very very large and high dosage of super plasticizer is required in case of rice husk ash and that is a deterrent in fact in their use because if you have too much of super plasticizer the side effect or negative effect of the super plasticizer quite often becomes apparent they will be excessive bleeding may be setting is disturbed because it may not set within the reasonable time setting characteristics get affected. So, optimal super plasticizer dosage is usually high in rice husk ash and that is usually is a deterrent that is usually deterrent in some cases. The water demand is you know this is mainly because of their cellular structure and large specific surface that is what we are mentioning. So, if I put it redid again the water demand of rice husk ash is also high going to cellular structure and large specific surface. So, on one side is the fly ash which has got least effect on to the super plasticizer demand and the extreme is rice husk ash which has got the highest you know high range water reducing agent demand silica fume is somewhat less than rice husk ash. GGBFS also will show something like this. So, this diagram shows is the rheological characteristics which we will discuss sometime later on when you talk of fresh concrete properties. You see the fresh concrete or fresh paste can be considered to be a plastic material. So, a plastic material is one a plastic material is one plastic state there in plastic state and plastic state is one where under the constant load it will deform continuously. A solid deforms under load and stress is proportional to strain in whatever form it is shear stress is proportional to shear strain. Plastic is one which would not deform I mean which would not behave like liquid initially, but if you apply some stress beyond the point of some stress which is called yield shear stress it will start behaving almost like liquid that is flow on its own. So, at a given load it will keep on flowing on its own without addition of further load liquid on the other hand just flows on its own and follows Newton's law of viscosity. So, they are called Newtonian liquid that is shear stress is proportional to velocity gradient or rate of shear strain and the constant of proportionality is the viscosity. So, plastic after yield shear stress has reached it will behave almost like liquid and you have got a plastic viscosity. So, if I look at plastic viscosity and yield stress of this paste the plastic material paste then when you have you know if it is this is my state if I add G G B F S what it does it reduces the yield shear stress all right because it gives you a little bit of you know uniform in sort of fine particle in the material, but it also increases the viscosity. So, the friction that means resistance against flow will be increased more paste causes reduction in you know viscosity viscosity increase, but reduction in yield shear stress more water causes reduction in viscosity and reduction in yield shear stress as well. You reduce the paste you will increase the yield shear stress and viscosity may reduce somewhat cement dispersing admixtures they actually reduce they can you know increase of viscosity or reduce the viscosity as well, but in shear stress definitely they improve. And if you look at flyers like thing pulverized fuel S of course, this is so if you pulverize the fuel and then the S is generated pulverized fuel S actually behave like adding more water almost like adding more water. So, this gives us some idea how rheological properties are changed rheological properties are change and this would be more clear when you look to the look to the rheology of concrete fresh concrete workability etcetera etcetera. So, one side is flyers the other extreme is of course the rise of scarce which increases the super plasticized demand as far as rheology is concerned flyers actually gives you a plasticizing effect like adding more water, but G G B F S which is angular in nature does reduce the yield shear stress, but of course increases viscosity bleeding with flyers if you look at it flyers concrete reduces bleeding. Now, what is bleeding is the since specific gravity of water is least amongst the constituents of concrete you know you add cement which is specific gravity of which is 3.14 specific gravity right that is mass of the cement divided by the volume of the cement solid. So, that is actually specific gravity you can you know you can talk of talk in terms of generally by definition of course, specific gravity is related to the specific gravity of water, but we can understand this equivalent to the mass of the solid divided by volume of the so that specific gravity is 3.14 if you look at water it is 1, aggregates are around 2.6 2.7 and flyers if you add mineral admixtures there largely 2.1 2.2. So, water is the is the lightest material amongst all the ingredients of concrete. So, it will have a tendency to come up and this can lead to a phenomena called bleeding when water comes up at the top solid subsides that is basically bleeding. Now, the bleeding of course, some sort of bleeding is not really desirable excess bleeding is not desirable channel bleeding is not desirable we will know about channel bleeding and other kind of bleeding sometime later on when we talk of properties of fresh concrete, but this materials mineral admixtures when you add they reduce the bleeding because they are finding the system they are finer and of the cement size and may be finer than cement. So, they can retain the water more and what tendency of water coming up becomes less. So, bleeding actually reduces down bleeding reduces when you add this material that is mineral admixtures like flyers. So, is the case with the silicon film they will have a tendency to reduce the bleeding. Now, you can see in this diagram, bleeding percentage as a function of time you know bleeding percentage is a volume of water that would have come or subsidence you can talk in terms of subsidence of the concrete that is original height you know the new height or reduction in height divided by the original height that is we call the subsidence we can measure it in that manner. That if I express as percentage we find that normal concrete control concrete shows high amount of bleeding or even you can talk in terms of percentage of water volume of water which has come in. So, this will be clear when we discuss bleeding itself, but flyers reduces this is understood flyers reduces the bleeding that can be really understood the difference is quite significant. If you look at plastic shrinkage well you know when we add water to the cement system and the volume of the cement paste is formed it occupy somewhat less volume than the original overall volume there can be certain shrinkage at the plastic state itself. And this we can see that you know this gets reduced down, but if you look at air entertainment first we will look at plastic shrinkage you know lower plastic shrinkage and now this is first let us say plastic shrinkage will have lower plastic shrinkage that is because water is retained you know relatively water is retained and the volume changes are relatively less. So, they can hold together the water and therefore, overall volume changes less besides they have the specific gravity somewhat lower than the cement. So, cement has a tendency you know like cement when so, plastic shrinkage is essentially the volume reduction because the water will come at the top and they might evaporate and there is a volume reduction. Now, this would be less it follows from the same understanding that it has got less bleeding it can hold on to the water and therefore, plastic shrinkage will be less. Now, air entertainment if you look at it air entertainment is done in order to improve the frost resistance where freezing and thawing is a problem for example, in cold climate. So, you would like to have higher air entertainment and we generally add air entraining agent which I have mentioned earlier sometime that they actually change the surface tension of the page water in the paste and thereby they actually make it easy for bubble to form. If you recall the chemical admixtures when we are talking about we said they have head and tail and therefore, something is hydrophobic something is hydrophilic hydrophobic and has a tendency to hold on to air and thereby form air bubbles. Now, this air entertainment percentage if it get disturbed then it is you know mineral admixtures performance in cold climate or where freezing thawing is possible could be questionable. But let us see what happens. So, air content with obviously, there is a reduction in air content with all the you know mineral admixtures. So, if I have increased the dosage of the binder I find that there is reduction in the air content whereas, control gives you much higher air content they all reduce the air content. So, it is not very it reduces down the efficiency of air entertainment it reduces down the efficiency of air entertainment find particles which you add this find particles to the nutritious particle which you add they reduce down the efficiency of air entertainment. So, volume of air that gets entrapped is or rather entrained is relatively less in this particular cases. So, this is another effect the strength part is important if you see strength for fly ash concrete without fly ash is something like this and if I have fly ash concrete let us say I design for identical 28 day strength the alde strength will be less, but long term strength is much higher. Now, if you recall we looked into the microstructure development of this material we were talking of cement and hydro you know hydration of cement etcetera etcetera. Now, reaction of fly ash is generally slow fly ash reaction is slow. Poissonic reaction not all shows this way, but let us look at fly ash right now reaction is fly ash is slow besides unless I have sufficient liberation of calcium hydroxide you know it is with the calcium hydroxide the fly ash reacts. So, unless I have sufficient amount of calcium hydroxide concentration in the mix or in the product you know hydration product the Poissonic reaction due to fly ash will not initiate and then again it is slow. If you recall of lime reactivity test we cured it for 10 days. First 48 hours one even does not try to demold it because lime and pozzolina reaction is slow. So, the it does not harden sufficiently within first 48 hours. So, if you open the mold the surface will simply crumble because it is not sufficiently strong to hold itself the framework is not ready and then we cure it at 100 percent relative to 60 degree temperature for 8 days. So, therefore, this indicates whereas, cement water system you can simply you can simply demold it after 24 hours. So, for T 8 hours you do not demold and you do not test for strength cement system you can test for strength even after 24 hours or 3 days, but here you test it only after 8 days. Therefore, since you test it only after 8 days it shows the reaction process is very slow that is one effect. So, reaction rate is slow so A reaction rate is slow B sufficient lime sufficient lime must be made available sufficient C H must become available for FA to exhibit pozzolonic reaction pozzolonic pozzolonic city. So, I must have sufficient amount of sufficient amount of lime in the system and therefore, first 10 days I do not see any strength gain. In fact, if you see same 28 day strength R D strength is much less. So, this is the case with blended cement or fly ash addition. So, whenever you add pozzolonic addition blended cement of course, grinding can be more to compensate for this somewhat, but if you add fly ash part of the fly ash in the mix and design it for same 28 day strength R D strength is unlikely to be high demolding time may be more. So, this one must keep in mind, but this is not a problem because you can only is designed for higher 28 day strength as well. So, that is not a problem, but the point is if you have same 28 day strength R D strength is really less when you have mineral admixture added in the like fly ash mineral admixture fly ash added into the system. But what about long term strength? Well long term strength of course, it shows significant increase because after the pozzolonic reaction has started the void space within the cement system cement water system which was earlier occupied by simply fly ash particles. Now, as we have seen the hydration process that more and more fly ash will react with calcium hydroxide of course, there is a limit because we have seen that pure silica about 15 percent pure silica can remain limit I mean react because the calcium hydroxide liberated would be it can consume only about you know only in the maximum all silica fume that is added can be consumed by lime if it is just about 15 percent of the cement. So, slime will consume the fly ash say about 28 percent or so because 55 percent type of fly ash 55 percent silica is there in fly ash. So, 15 divided by 0.55 is some around 28 percent. So, about 28 percent of the fly ash can be consumed gradually by the lime in order to make the concrete more solid the void space which was formed in the beginning would be now filled with hydration product replacing the non-silink precipitate of calcium hydroxide calcium hydroxide is fairly soluble non-silink precipitate. So, this reduces down the void and since the voids or pore space capillary pores are reduced down there is an increase in strength there is an increase in strength since pore sizes become final. So, both ways long term strength is much better with fly ash. Right this is what it is. So, with 28 days A is the fly ash concrete A is the fly ash concrete B is the normal strength concrete you know strength with fly ash concrete. In fact, if you see the calcium hydroxide content in case of B in case of B calcium hydroxide content is higher now what is B B is the ordinary concrete A is the fly ash concrete. So, this is fly ash fly ash concrete fly ash and this is no fly ash no fly ash. So, B will have much higher calcium chloride I mean calcium hydroxide much higher whereas, A has much less calcium hydroxide in the long run and that is how it makes it stronger in terms of you know I mean it is stronger in terms of load carrying capacity or this in terms of strength. So, long term strength is better short term strength is not so good. G B G G G B F S behaves almost like F A as far as R D strength development is concerned. Now, what is the mechanism of G G B F S if you recall we said that G G B F S G G B F S G G B F S can be activated in presence of cement and G G B F S actually exhibit cementitious product that is some hydration product of the G G B F S itself because it has got around 40 percent lime 40 percent lime around similar percentage silica. So, this lime together with the silica can give you CHS part of it and excess silica will of course, contribute to the porcelona. So, when you add with the cement cement cause activation of the G G B F S you know part of the cement like something like 60 percent slag 40 percent cement this actually activates the slag and therefore, slag shows its own hydration product and together with the cement hydration product and the lime liberated from the cement hydration product can react with the excess you know excess silica present which did not react to the lime of the G G B F S and they will fill in the void space within. But, however again its activation requires its activation requires its activation will require you know activation of G G B S will require cement dissolution of the cement material and it you know it does not start really R D and the porcelonic advantages also comes I mean much later one sufficient lime has been produced. So, porcelonic benefit is obtains later therefore, R D strength development is not very much as far as G G B F S is concerned it almost way like flyers right because the strength and hunts went in the long run due to the secondary porcelonic reaction that is again not available with G G B you know that is only available after certain period of time after sufficient lime has been consumed I mean has been produced by the cement reaction because it also has to depend on cement reaction the product of G G B F S hydration that will come but, the still the void space remaining between G G B F S and the cement particle is filled up by the product of porcelonic reaction between the excess silica present and the lime liberated from the cement and therefore, it is almost similar as before. But, silica fume and some you know silica fume and some type C F A rice has cash on the other hand are highly reactive and porcelonic reaction particularly this somewhat this is also relatively more reactive and can initiate as soon as calcium and hydroxy iron becomes available. So, sufficient concentration is not really required you know besides silica fume is very fine if you look at silica fume is the other extreme silica fume is very fine and fine silica fume fine silica fume gets into the pores of the cement system therefore, there is some amount of microfiller effect some amount of pore filling effect microfiller effect which goes in. So, therefore, even right in the beginning itself something like up to 5 micron size or 0.3 or 0.4 average micron size up to total maximum of 5 micron size that fills in within the wards of the cement system right in the beginning itself and even if they remain inert they have a tendency to reduce on the porosity. So, the microfiller effect starts acting right from the beginning and since its surface area is very large it can exhibit reaction it can exhibit porcelonic reaction as soon as some amount of lime is available as soon as some amount of lime is available. So, this makes silica fume extremely extremely reactive compared to fly ash right. So, early strength gain is not a major problem as far as silica fume is concerned. Rice has ash on the you know it has also got very high specific surface that is what we have seen. So, therefore, it can also exhibit reaction rate of reaction high rate of reaction it can also exhibit and therefore, the problem of high early strength may not be a major problem with rice ash ash ash. But other other problem is definitely there because rice ash ash ash ash is so cellular that it requires too much of super plus this is and therefore, as such getting it you know getting a hardened product itself may become some more problem but silica fume does not have any one of this problem in any case right. So, silica fume exhibits pore filling effect and it is highly reactive and even on all the edges but reacts slightly slow then rice ash ash ash ash ash ash ash ash still faster reaction causes. So, early strength wise this materials are not problem rice fly ash ash and ggbfs they are somewhat problematic. So, places where you expect early demolding you know these are not the best option straight away I mean you can still design the system because you can design the system with higher early you know overall much higher strength. So, that early strength itself is sufficiently high for your requirement if economics permit final terms economics. So, we know the behavior of the material how you use it that of course, is remains it has us. So, when it comes to fly ash and ggbfs there are the strength is relatively less but long term strength is much higher silica fume on the other hand has got high early strength and even long term strength will be better and therefore, we can use them you know we can use them for various purpose and it is one of the thing which can give you very relatively much higher strength than the concrete with any other material and that is what that is why it is resulted in you know it is the one which is which is resulted in development of let us say high strength concrete you know high strength or other kind of I mean some other you know very high strength concrete etcetera. Right therefore, ggbfs I prefer for one would prefer for normal strength concrete to moderate strength concrete. Rice hash cash can also be designed for slightly higher strength concrete slightly higher strength concrete silica fume can be used for very high strength concrete and therefore, you can have even judicious combinations of silica fume and fly ash etcetera etcetera. For example, another issue is of course, the cost part of it silica fume is the cost clearest in our country and many other countries as well which do not produce the silica fume. So, silica fume is the cost clearest in those countries we do not produce it it is about 7 to 8 times costlier than cement you know you let us say in UK or in India both the countries really do not produce this material right. So, therefore, if it is you know where it is produce it will be relatively cheaper. So, this is one thing since it is costlier therefore, one must use it judiciously. Now, where you want very high strength concrete well silica fume is the only solution I mean you know up to say 90 100 MPa plus or 110 MPa etcetera etcetera you want to get silica fume is the only solution. But, you want you know do not mind a little bit less strength somewhere you can operate on 90 strength might use silica fume together with fly ash because fly ash is fly ash is cheaply available. So, you use some percentage of silica fume may be you know usually you do not use more than 10 15 percent never more than 15 percent about 10 percent is the silica fume is a good amount because it has to fill in the spaces within the cement system and 10 percent is a good amount and you might still reduce it down and use fly ash. Now, if you use fly ash your workability will improve water reducing agent demand will reduce down but there will be reduction in alde strength alde strength alright. So, judicious use is possible you might improve the reduction in super plasticize demand, but compromise on strength. So, this kind of various kind of judicious use is possible you can use part fly ash plus part silica fume combinations and improve the strength gain as well as alde strength gain as well as you know overall strength and workability or plasticize demand etcetera. So, strength wise this is the relationship. Now, if you look at other mechanical properties most of the mechanical properties are related to compressive strength if you recall you know e modulus of elasticity is perhaps we have not talked to you so far it can be shown it can be shown that modulus of elasticity is actually proportional to under u cubic cube strength or cylinder strength of concrete. Similarly, if you look at tensile strength sigma t you know or f t you may call it f t you may call it f t f t you may call it f t you may call it f t. So, e is proportional to a proportional to under root f c similarly f t is proportional to under root f c most of the mechanical properties of concrete can be related to the compressive strength alright. This relationship this type of relationships are still valid in case of fly ash concrete as well fly ash concrete as well. So, modulus of elasticity they almost so similar kind of behavior. So, with fly ash and g g b of s modulus of elasticity will follow the similar trend as of is a opposite concrete because there is no reason why should it change similar sort of behavior should be largely seen you know by and large and the empirical formula which the code uses they are possibly they are generally conservative values and they can possibly work well generally work well with the fly ash concrete as well why. So, because after all you have not changed the basic nature of the particulate system bonded with some cementing material some sort of cementing system. So, earlier also you are doing the same thing now also you are doing the same thing only thing is the post instead of lime that was present which is actually a kind of non-celling precipitate you know and sparingly soluble now more you have more c h s. So, largely just behavior modulus of elasticity should not change you know you will find similar relationship similar type of behavior as the concrete without fly ash. But when you have high strength concrete you know what you are doing is you are essentially deducing the on the pores in the system we shall see that when we discuss about high strength concrete system you are reducing on the pores is in the system the pores are the one which are the weakness of flow in the material and cracks initiate from such flaws cracks initiate from such flaws. So, if you reduce down the pore sizes larger the sizes initiation of crack occurs at lower stress level. So, if you have smaller size pores the crack will initiate only it large you know more stresses this number one you reduce down the pore therefore, crack would be much less sizes of the pore reduce total volume of the pore reduce cracks would be much much less in fact, whole idea of high strength concrete is to reduce down pores of various sizes I mean larger sizes and improve the microstructure of the cement paste and what is called interfacial transition zone. So, this aspect will look into which is between the aggregate and the aggregate and the paste system earlier you aggregate and paste whichever is weak that will dictate the strength in case of concrete aggregate paste and interfacial transition zone whichever is weak will dictate the strength because that will fail already. Now, if I improve the it is with very fine material like silicon foam then crack cannot initiate there supposing in a material all three are of the similar strength then the failure would occur simultaneously all three of them therefore, there will be no micro cracking earlier there would have been micro cracking at the pores and then this cracks would propagate there are lot of cracking before failure. But, with fine material like silicon foam added fine post eronic material like silicon foam added the pores get refined paste strength interfacial transition zone strength and aggregate strength all tend to become very close to each other micro cracking cracking is less and that means the deformation at a given stress less as well is lower which means modulus of elasticity is higher. So, modulus of elasticity is higher in case of high strength concrete in case of high strength concrete and this has got another aspect silicon foam when you add it can improve the modulus of elasticity significantly in high strength concrete and it has got another effect also the deformation at failure is also less. So, stress strain behavior is basically this can also be related to the compressive strength at lower compressive strength level behavior is something like you know behavior is something like I will just show you at lower stress strain level concrete would behave like this this is at lower strength concrete high strength concrete will behave something like this will have discussion on this when you talk of high strength concrete. So, higher strength concrete so, you can see the modulus of elasticity increases and deformation at which it fails is also relatively less actually is cement you know this is this behavior is between the cement paste behavior and aggregate behavior since you improve the cement paste somewhat up there. So, therefore, this behavior is realized in case of high strength high strength concrete high strength concrete. So, you have higher modulus of elasticity in case of high strength concrete. Now, if you look at the if you look at the behavior you know in general and codel diagram now you see the compressive strength versus I said that everything can be related to compressive strength modulus of elasticity can be related to compressive strength like it is done in normal concrete and with mineral admixtures also you can you know related to a compressive strength. So, this is a for example, ACI design formula which is suggested we have I S code and any other code will have similar kind of thing and the relate it in fact, if you see I S code it will be 5000 under root F C K that is the relationship. So, that kind of empirical relationship with ACI you know American concrete institute there do have similar kind of formula and this is actually conservative real lines with control concrete that is without fly ash etcetera lies somewhere there this line is much lower than that it is usually conservative design values are cap lower than you know which should not be you know like to cover a little bit of you have it less risk K. So, you keep E values smaller, but it has been observed the fly ash with fly ash concrete the values are also above this line that means, your design formula really would not be affected by addition of fly ash really would not be affected by addition of fly ash alright. See this is again the same thing we are re iterating modulus of elasticity tensile strength and other mechanical properties can be related to compressive strength of OPC concrete. For concrete is supplementary is symmetric material same is also 2 same is also true and the relationship is similar may be coefficient might change a little bit here and there, but largely same is also valid because after all the basic nature of the material has not changed earlier also you have particulate system bonded by an inorganic product of hydration and now also it is same. So, if you apply load is deformation characteristics will not be significantly different then you know the nature of the behavior we are talking the nature of the behavior. So, it will not be significantly different than the concrete without such mineral admixtures right. Therefore, relationships are also likely to be similar relationships are also likely to be similar relationships are also likely to be similar. This is important quite often when one is using this material one would like to know what are the effect on creep shrinkage and modulus of elasticity and other properties. Now, creep is the deformation under sustained load concrete exhibit creep many other material steel for example, exhibit creep at very high temperature many other materials exhibit creep that is you keep the load constant it will show deformation it will continuously going deforming. So, you keep the concrete something like this you apply load able to apply the load let us a fixed and hold it in position after sometime you will find that you know first is the elastic deformation and then there is some creep deformation after time. So, this creep deformation would occur now this is important in long span bridges, priestess concrete bridges because loss of creep due to creep there can be loss of priestess it is important in tall structures sometime later on when you talk of mechanical properties of concrete will be discussing about that in a little bit more detail. Now, this creep with flyers let us see what happens you see this is this is the this is the creep in terms of microstrain right stress level OPC and this dotted lines are the pFA. So, you have same you know this is the time of loading time under load 180 days. So, stress level if you have put at 80 percent of the static strength 80 percent of the static strength or 90 percent of the static strength you see the creep is much less in case of flyers concrete if you keep it at 60 percent same percentage 30 30 you will find that. So, what you generally observe is that pFA concrete has got much less creep much less creep because of the change on the microstructure which is there in other words the water held in the microstructure or gel force it has this has got something to do with the creep and with the more gel space available gel structure hydration product available the creep behavior also change and it changes positively in case of flyers concrete. So, creep of flyers concrete pulverized fuel as concrete has been observed to be lower. So, flyers lowers down the creep for weight concrete for dry concrete difference with the OPC is usually small. So, if you keep it moist both then of course, the difference reduces down however, it still will have some amount of reduction. So, that is the observation curing is concrete is definitely important and you know you have to cure more in case of flyers because you want to ensure that the postionic reaction really initiates and line production always takes place. So, curing is very very important and curing is also related to creep and shrinkage. Keep creep with slag if you look at it zero replacement percentage replace 30 percent and 80 percent replacement and basic creep. So, therefore, you can see that as I add the slag creep really reduces down time under load same. So, basically GB GBFS lower creep for concrete more in obviously, in weight condition same like flyers the behavior is almost similar as flyers. Then drying shrinkage and creep high strength silica fume concrete exhibit less creep that is also has been observed even silica fume shows less creep. Creep and drying shrinkage are controlled by gel pores that is what I is mentioning that is the gel pores are the one which controls the creep and drying shrinkage. Ocus when water moves out from the capillary pores and then gel water will have you know the vapor pressure gradient to exist between the gel and the capillary pores itself. Gel water itself will have movement drying off and this causes collapse of the gel structure or change in dimension and therefore, that is what is drying shrinkage. So, drying shrinkage both are controlled by gel pores and gel water. So, if gel water can be held for longer period of time you know drying would be effect will be much less and shrinkage also creeper effect will be also less. GBFS of course, has little effect on drying shrinkage not much whereas, flyers and silica fume does that. Shinkage increases silica fume shrinkage silica fume concrete are less creep, but shrinkage of course, increases silica fume may be compensated with good curing and aggregate choice and some shrinkage compensating mixture that we have mentioned silica fume reacts very early and that can cause actually you know slight increase in the shrinkage although creep is reduced. So, shrinkage and creep properties with different types of mineral admixtures or something like this. So, flyers seems to be reducing down the creep as well as shrinkage. GBFS of course, reduces down the creep, but shrinkage it has little effect on drying shrinkage silica fume reduces a bit less creep, but drying shrinkage it actually has higher drying shrinkage compared to you know it increases the drying shrinkage and you can compare it compensates with good curing and aggregate choice etcetera etcetera and shrinkage compensates effect. Now, before we come to durability I just like to point out this curing is very important for mineral admixtures curing you need higher days of curing with pausolonic pausolonic mineral admixtures because their reaction itself is slow and sufficient line must be produced before pausolonic reaction can be realized. So, if that is the case you must cure it for slightly longer period of time. So, that it has got sufficient strength gain for removal of the side shattering strength gain is slower. So, wherever strength gain is slower you have to do more curing and you have to ensure also what is called capillary segmentation. So, therefore, where you require 7 to 8, you have to do more curing and you have to do more curing and you have to ensure also what is called capillary segmentation. So, therefore, where you require 7 days curing with only OPC and fly ash you would possibly require 10 days, where you need 10 days in a dry condition as far as OPC is concerned with OPC and fly ash you will possibly require 14 days. So, curing required is more for this material. Next is the durability issues. See if you look at one of the properties say chloride diffusion coefficient. Now, durability firstly related to ingress of material from outside. So, ingress of moisture for example, that is the main cause because almost all durability problem as we shall be seeing later on is associated with chemical reaction of some sort of aggressive agent or you know contaminant coming from outside. They may be inside also even if they are inside since the deterioration reaction any most of the deterioration reaction requires presence of water that is they occur in solution phase. Therefore, water ingress is a mass now water would be coming from outside. Initial water is too small that will get reacted and if you do not do anything they will evaporate. But in future the moisture penetrates into the concrete deterioration process can follow you know depending upon the situation aggressive agent may come with water in solution or some sort of aggressive agent already present in present in the concrete can become you know reaction process can start because there will be 4 solutions now available with water coming in. So, therefore, when more of the ingress more ingress becomes possible you know when ingress becomes more possible or if it gets reduced if it is more then durability is less if it is less durability is more. Now, we have already said that with fly ash GGBFS or silica fume pore structure gets refined microstructure gets refined pores become less pore sizes becomes lower and in fact with a appropriate amount of curing pore pores will be easily segmented inter connectivity will be reduced. So, therefore, durability of such concrete is likely to be better then OPC concrete some of the specific durability problem let us see one of them is but there are other other issues also let us see some of them is for example, chloride diffusion coefficient just let us you know how chloride chloride you know chloride diffusion coefficient is a measure of basically possibility of or you know like the flow of chloride inside the concrete whichever value as high diffusion coefficient it means that it allows it is likely to allow more chloride to come in. So, what is observed is that if you have OPC this value is somewhere like this but if you have sulphate resisting cement the value increases significantly fly ash and OPC reduces it down and slag and OPC still reduces down. There are 2 aspects in this one all the chloride that goes into the concrete some of them gets bound. Now, this binding is associated with C 3 A trichlorism aluminate. So, sulphate resisting cement which has got least C 3 A shows high chloride diffusivity OPC has got some C 3 A therefore, it has got high diffusivity compared to others but this has got this would improve because the pore structure itself would be improved and nothing can penetrate through it the penetration process become less and possibly chloride binding is also perhaps not you know slag and PPC fly ash may be able to you know able to physically bind some chloride but more importantly they make the concrete more impervious. Therefore, you can find that fly ash and OPC slag and OPC they perform mineral admixture addition perform better as far as chloride diffusion coefficient is concerned. So, chloride in this mean you know now obviously, the threshold at which corrosion will start chloride is important from corrosion point of view and this will understand when you look at durability of concrete. So, threshold depends on steel type cement type and mineral admixtures mineral admixtures performs better that is what we have understood. Therefore, corrosion initiation time can be longer but type of steel has some role to play as well. Well, there are two types of chlorides one is acid soluble chloride and water soluble chloride and this ratio acid soluble chloride is bound chloride chemically bound chloride also it includes and generally this varies from 1.25 to 1.6 for many of this blended cement and is surely high surely high for blended cement compared to let us say sulphate resistance. Now, another aspect is the resistivity of concrete this is important with respect to reinforcement corrosion because which is an electrochemical process. So, resistivity of concrete higher the resistivity higher the resistivity generally concrete will perform better against river corrosion because high resistivity means less current will flow less electrolytic current will flow and we will have some will look at that sometime later on when we look at durability. But, let us say relative resistivity you can see that OPC you know and PPC. So, this is OPC PSC is the complete dark one. So, any cases any cases with various kind of chloride percentages this is the chloride content in all cases you will see there are two three cement water cement ratios you will find that the relative resistivity of OPC is somewhere here and with PPC and PSC it is somewhere there OPC is somewhere here the small. So, resistivity is a supersonic material and therefore, they can provide better protection again river corrosion. So, mineral that makes us therefore, would perform better because they tend to increase the resistivity right. So, this again this mechanism etcetera we will look into sometime later on when look at durability. So, this is important because resistivity is an important issue and it reduces down the corrosion rate. So, this we can look into later on well the other one more durability related to corrosion processes carbonation depth with mineral air mixture this will reduce down this will surely reduce down with mineral air mixture because they consume this depends upon alkalinity calcium hydroxide. So, if you have calcium hydroxide is consumed by the atmospheric carbon dioxide and pH of concrete reduces down and that is carbonation. So, it has been observed that if you use OPC with you know the carbonation depth carbonation this value carbonation depth is given by this factor K higher the K for a given time carbonation will be more and this values of AFMB this term which depends upon the type of cementitious material you find that you know it is OPC shows 6.23.7 for different strength of concrete, but PPC etcetera shows you know OPC plus flyers 28 percent and it shows somewhat higher values which means that K will be higher it shows somewhere higher values which means K will be higher. So, for a given time carbonation depth is higher with mineral admixtures will discuss this sometime later on. So, with mineral admixtures carbon action depth increases you know rate of carbonation actually increases because calcium hydroxide are consumed by them right in the beginning right. So, these are the other part of the formula which you might discuss sometime later on when you talk of durability, but carbonation depth increases with addition of mineral air mixture this will be clear we need talk of durability. So, mineral admixtures perform basically alkali aggregate reaction this we know because permeability and diffusion this reduces large better pore structure reduces down moisture in gas therefore, mineral admixtures perform better against alkali aggregate reaction good resistance against corrosion propragation against magnesium sulphate is still uncertain at the moment there are some report that they are not very good against magnesium sulphate, but other sulphate attack they are again better. So, mineral admixtures generally improves durability properties of concrete as well this will be again further discussed when you talk of durability. So, we can summarize the whole thing now this module this is the last lecture of this module we have looked first into the chemical admixtures and then into the mineral admixtures and this part of the mineral admixtures we have first looked into their characterization then looked into their effect on fresh concrete then into the hardened concrete creep shrinkage strength creep shrinkage and then the durability. As far as durability is concerned they perform mostly they perform better except for carbonation where carbonation depth tend to increase with addition of mineral admixtures. So, I think with this we can actually conclude this module you know and thank you very much for here. === Lecture 13 Transcript === for of concrete technology. You may recall in module 1, 2 and 3 we discussed about the materials those goes into the concrete and having done that. Now we can look into the procedure of mixed proportionate. Conventionally this is called mixed design as well and in our discussion the general outline of the discussion is we will first mention about how do you specify concrete for a given application. The mixed proportioning or mixed design procedures by and large in general then the methods those are available. So, today we will be talking about general method you know method in general and in successive classes we will be talking about various methods those are adopted. So, what is the mix objective of the mixed design? What is the objective of a mixed design principle? First of all to find the combination of constituents that would give concrete having properties complying with certain specifications and of course, it must do it economically because those are the basic fundamental principles in all engineering designs or principles. Now, then one must specify the properties right or the characteristics of concrete those satisfy the need at the fresh and hardened states that is the characteristics of the concrete those satisfy needs at the fresh and hardened states those goes into the specifications. So, we must find out the constituent proportion of the constituents in the concrete which would satisfy certain properties and those properties are decided based on certain specifications. Characteristics of the concrete are those you know those would satisfy are the properties of fresh and hardened concrete. So, this are the properties of fresh and hardened concrete fresh and hardened concrete. No constituents would select such that we get the properties of concrete with certain specifications. Now, the specifications are in terms of properties of fresh and hardened state properties of concrete. These properties are of course, selected based on application and expected performance. So, this is important to understand expected performance right. So, they are selected based on application and expected performance. Now, we said fresh and hardened concrete properties although we have not looked into or not really defined various kind of properties of concrete as yet which you shall do in our successive modules. Fresh concrete properties are specified in terms of some of those engineering characteristics called slum, BV or compaction factor. These are some engineering properties devised for measurement of fresh concrete properties. What these values are? What are they will come to this in detail sometime later on? We will also talk about a little bit on the measurement methods, but commonly adopted one is the slum. So, we specify concrete fresh concrete properties in terms of a property called slum and these values what is slum will come to it in our next module when we talk about fresh concrete more in details. But for the time being let us understand that it is the height or settlement of a standard onical shape of concrete prepared in a standard manner that is fresh state. So, it is settlement of such a shape concrete under its own way. We will see that sometime later on, but at the moment let us say slump is one of the properties and this property is most commonly used. The method of placing section dimension amount of reinforcement present this decides the property requirement that means slum could be decided or compaction factor or BV time BV unit of BV time this is a fraction all this have decided based upon the method of placing section dimension and amount of reinforcement present. For example, slump of concrete specified let us say Indian standard method for shallow section it is very low for mass concrete you know for shallow section is very low for lightly reinforced beam it is low from 25 to 75 millimeter heavily reinforced beam 50 to 100 millimeter and if you want to pump the concrete it should be 100 to 150 millimeter. So these are given in code for example, Indian standard code of course is Indian standard code of course is IS 456 2000. So, Indian standard code is IS 456 2000 and these are specified in such code. So, this is how we express or we specify the properties of fresh concrete. Harden concrete since concrete is a structure and material we specify the grade of concrete in terms of it compressive strength at certain age because in the module 1 we have seen that reaction of cement with water produces a material which is stone like but this formation of this hardened material from a plastic stage takes time first it solidifies and then gradually it gains strength and this process of strength gain takes time quite often could be months. It has been standardized age has been standardized for measurement of compressive strength in you know through standard samples or specimens at the age of 28 days. So, we measure the compressive strength of concrete at its 28 days age but not necessarily always will specify the concrete strength alone at 28 days it might specify it or some earlier age also depending upon the requirement for example, you know in some cases we might specify this at 7 days we might specify it at 7 days 7 days or 1 day. Grade of concrete is always defined with respect to 28 days compressive strength. Generally in Indian scenario it is cubes and we will talk about that sometime later on why I mean how you know concrete strength is affected by the specimen size, shape etc etc. So, in Indian scenario we talk in terms of grade of concrete measuring the strength at the age of 28 days compressive strength at 28 days and we specify it in terms of something called characteristic strength. Characteristic strength is defined as that strength which would be you know which would be exhibited by more than 95 percentile of the cubes. We might also specify the concrete strength in terms of tensile strength at certain appropriate age in some cases maybe we are designing for you know tensile strength of concrete sometime let us say in water retaining structures or where flexile strength becomes very important criteria let us say in pavement we might specify the required specify the concrete in terms of tensile strength also flexile tensile strength also in addition to 28 days compressive strength, 28 days compressive strength and grade. But this is not all concrete must remain durable or must be able to endure the environment to which it is exposed to over a long period of time right and that is related to its durability. Deerability is the property by virtue of which the concrete can withstand the environment to which it is exposed over a long period of time. So, although at the moment most of the codes do not quantify the durability in terms of let us say a service life or something, but we understand durability is a property related to its endurance to various kind of exposure condition and our understanding in terms of quantity we have understanding durability property is limited. At the moment from the knowledge of the mixed proportion and knowing the exposure condition I may not be we may not be able to say how long concrete would be able to perform as required it must perform you know it must be functionally satisfactory it must exhibit functional performance, satisfactory functional performance. Performance would mean that it should be able to carry the load all other satisfy all other serviceability requirement should not show excessive deflection cracking etcetera etcetera. So, performing suspectally for a period now, but this period is not really known to us at the moment or rather we cannot calculate it out very precisely with the current state of knowledge of concrete. Therefore, most of the codes or all codes actually till date specifies some prescriptive measures or rather recommend some kind of prescriptive measures in order to ensure adequate durability performance during the intended design life intended design life. So, durability requirements therefore, are specified or rather you know they are specified in terms of some prescription of minimum cement content and maximum water cement ratio or minimum grade of concrete etcetera minimum cement content, maximum water cement ratio and minimum grade of concrete etcetera minimum grade of concrete etcetera all right. Okay so, what we have seen we specify concrete first of all in terms of fresh concrete property and a common way of doing that is in terms of slum. We specify also concrete in terms of its braid which is generally related to 28 days or characteristic compressive strength at the age of 28 days. We might specify strength of concrete or hardened properties of concrete in terms of strength at some appropriate age may be earlier age some cases we will require that. For example, where we want to do already demolding right say a pretension pre-cars system where I would like to apply some pretension to the concrete exposed to some kind of pretension in such situation I might require high early strength. So, in addition to grade of concrete I might also specify the strength at some early age some other cases I might specify tensile strength of concrete at let us say at some age then comes the long term properties at the hardened state. At the moment we have some prescriptive recommendation given in codes namely we specify minimum cement content maximum water to cement ratio and minimum grade of concrete to ensure adequate durability of concrete. Now, why water cement ratio, why minimum grade of concrete and why minimum cement content and maximum water cement ratio all this will be understand understood when you talk of durability of concrete sometime later on in some additional module. So, at the moment we are trying to look at the mix design. So, this is how we specify the concrete and once these specifications are available some more additional information may be needed. These additional information are maximum size of nominal maximum size of aggregate which is again decided by the spacing of the reinforcement, the section, the cover and also somewhat related to the strength of concrete. A high strength concrete may be relatively more easily designed with lower maximum size of aggregate compared to let us say a low strength concrete which can consume even the larger size aggregate. The reasons we will explain and we will understand sometime later on but what at the moment we want to understand is the maximum size of aggregate is an important information I would need one would need to do the mixed proportionate. All right. Then where are the aggregates rounded or crushed? Natural aggregates are generally rounded as we have seen earlier and we have seen also that shape governs the packing characteristics of aggregate because we have talked about aggregate material and rounded or crushed and we know that rounded aggregate rounded aggregate rounded aggregate packs better than crushed aggregate. They are grading the proportion in each size and that is what we have seen if you depending upon the proportion the packing characteristics of the aggregate depends upon the proportion of each size that goes into making of the or packing of the aggregate themselves. Similarly for sand the grading zones may be important again that is telling us what is the size fraction belonging to which size proportion belonging to each size fraction that is what it is. Fineness modulus also we have discussed sometime earlier is again related to the kind of a measure of an average size. So size of the aggregate the packing characteristics proportions in you know packing characteristics are governed by shape of the aggregate maximum size of aggregate and proportion in each size these are issues are this information are important. Now these are important from the point of view of availability of aggregate because one would like to use locally available aggregate to minimize the cost of the concrete and all other transportation related you know negative aspects for example energy consumption in transportation and so on so forth. So one would like to use locally aggregate available aggregate and therefore what is the size fractions available if there is anything missing such information would become important in the design. But we have already seen how this MSA effects the packing characteristics of aggregate how shape of aggregate effects the packing characteristics and its effect on fresh concrete etc we will understand of course later on. One more important one more information is important is the specific gravity of aggregate because volume occupied by unit you know volume occupied or mass in unit volume this is what unit volume of the aggregate. So volume to mass ratio is through specific gravity and therefore this is also an important information. What we do is we actually measure this before doing the mixed proportioning or before doing the mixed design we generally measure this if this information is not available. We would like to know type of cement and cement strength is not a necessity these days cement strength is not a necessity cement strength is not a necessity this is not a necessity but some of the some of the codes might use cement strength as an input to mixed design. In fact earlier Indian standard was using this cement strength as an input but now it is not a necessity in Indian code that is 10262 Indian code 10262 so IS 10262 this is not a necessity anymore this is not a necessity anymore but earlier the code was using it. So that is why this appears here but by and large we do not need this information now. Now type of cement is important particularly related to durability particularly related to durability well this information is important in the sense that from the point of view of minimum cement content we have got some importance not really much but what would be important for us to know from our possibly past experience or from our record how much is a strength you know kind of strength to water cement ratio relationship for concrete that becomes an important. So any type of cement may be may be specified because this is what you would be using. So if you have to do a trial casting you will be use that particular type of cement. If I am using some admixtures what is the kind of admixtures I am using that information is important and is compatibility with the cement and the other system overall system that is also an important aspect. Absorption of aggregate and moisture absorption of aggregate and the moisture content of aggregate this is an important information this will have to know we measure the moisture content at what is called saturated surface dry SSD condition which you have seen earlier earlier we have seen. So we measure the moisture content required for attaining SSD condition from bone dry to SSD condition what is the moisture content you know how much is the moisture content related to SSD condition that is the information is important because in actual site moisture content may be different so you will do some adjustment accordingly. And then this is an important information degree of quality control degree of quality control that is achievable at the site this is an important information you know standard deviation we will discuss this a little bit more in the next couple of slides. So degree of quality control or control that is achievable at the site this is very important. Remember grade of concrete is always related to the site situation although concrete is you know concrete is prepared and tested in the laboratory which can be a site laboratory very well it should be a site laboratory. Now the site laboratory should take account of actual control available while production. So that is what the degree of quality control is important why it is important will become clear as we go through our next couple of slides. How do we fix this? This will fix based on recommendation of relevant standards like we said that like we said that the slump is given is I F 456 2000 for let us say pumpable concrete it should be about 100 to 150 mm in fact 120 mm or 130 mm is possibly the minimum good slump at which pumpability can be achieved. So relevant of the standard is very important you know I mean recommendation of the relevant standard is very important. So we select this specification based on recommendation of the standard in India of course mostly we do it based on IS 456 IS 456 2000 at the moment we do with respect to this one we do it with respect to this right. So in any other country they will have all other countries will have their corresponding standards and accordingly we will select this. Now this specification must be really I mean what is achievable? So it must be realistic it should be achievable. There must be non conflicting no conflict no conflict non conflicting you know two specifications for example specification mentioned in case of durability should not be conflicting with something else some other specification. So this would be this would be very important they should not be conflicting conflicting specification should not be there and they should be realistic guidelines of the codes are usually taken relevant standards and code and then it must be discussed with all parties involved before fixing this specification. Let us say contractor the man or the you know the group which will be actually doing the jogger side construction work execution of the construction the designer the maybe even depending upon the situation even sometime you know the owner maybe also involved if they are knowledgeable. So all contribution of all the people involved that should be taken into account and then these specifications are finalized and obviously previous experience in the similar side place a big role. So specifications are fixed according to this kind of you know this past experience codes ideas from everybody involved and so on so forth. Now what does the fresh concrete property depend? Well this we talk in details in the next module but we take it for granted at the moment that it depends upon main neon paste content main neon paste content we can understand this. Sometimes perhaps when you are talking of aggregate we have because that they should pack very well. Now the aggregates themselves are not you know moldable. Fresh concrete properties relates to moldability. I should be able to mold it easily and fresh concrete properties relates to moldability. How can I mold? Molding process involves essentially driving out the air from the concrete because fresh concrete when I place it it contains about 30 percent air voids into it right normal concrete they will contain about 30 percent air void in it and this has to be driven away. The second issue is seldom it is in the location where final you know it is in the shape it is not in the shape of the mold itself. So there has to be some flow to get to acquire the shape of the mold itself. So therefore it must we must drive out there and also it must acquire its shape also that means there are some mobility is needed and by this process of mobility the aggregates and the concrete itself should get placed into the mold in its appropriate position and air must also be driven away. This is best done done by vibration this best done by vibration in normal concrete. Of course there is special concrete called self compacting concrete which are becoming popular and popular nowadays but in normal concrete we adopt vibration in order to drive out there and get the shape of the concrete appropriate same shape as we desire the desired shape according to the mold. Therefore concrete must be able to flow it must be able to flow now this flow ability if you look at it aggregates are not flowable they are stones and they themselves are just not flowable okay they can little bit flow or when a move and from a hip they have an angle of repose right they can form and hip and they will forms hip like this and they will have what is called angle of repose. So some angle of repose where this sort of an angle where it can it will have some sort of angle so they can form an angle and you know from a hip now paste so therefore if I vibrate it they may not move a little bit but not much but if I have paste inside them paste in the aggregate system paste in the aggregate system this paste are easily flowable because they are more of a plastic state. So con aggregates and paste together is in plastic state and it is a paste which is easily flowable in fact in the paste again the water is more easily flowable. So if I have small amount of paste within the aggregate is not going to work I should have sufficient paste which will fill in all the voids within the aggregate system and when I put a little bit of vibration the paste themselves should be able to move and also take the aggregate along with them. So therefore paste content is an important issue as far as their fresh concrete properties are concerned right it depends upon water content and paste in the paste the main thing which is actually flowable easily or which causes getting into the new shape under vibration it is the water okay we should see this sometime so paste water content or in other words paste content is the most important thing which dictates the flowability or moldability of the concrete and therefore fresh concrete properties is largely governed by moldability. The other issue of course is it should remain plastic during my placing and compaction. So that is related to what is called setting properties we have seen setting properties of cement setting properties of concrete it depends upon the setting properties of cement alright but it also depends upon the setting characteristics of the admixture that I have added because some admixtures can retard that is what we have seen when we talked of admixtures some admixtures can retard the setting of concrete therefore in concrete setting properties of concrete is governed by properties of both cement as well as the properties of admixtures they control. So it should remain plastic during the compaction up to the compaction straight complete molding stage actually complete up to complete molding stage alright and it should be easily flowable. Now this properties are dictated by paste content and water content mainly water content and paste content right and I would not like to keep too much of paste because paste content cement which is the cost-reaste of all the materials and therefore you know if I have too much of paste the cost cost of the concrete will increase in normal concrete. So I would like to keep the optimal quantity of paste and yet get the right kind of moldability related properties that is clamp is one of one such property. So optimal quantity of paste means water as well as fine materials such as cement, flyers and similar other material right. Now that would be ensured if I want to keep minimal material that would be ensured by packing characteristics of the aggregate if the pack very well you remember we talked something of packing density which is the mass of solid in let us say unit volume of the bulk material. So one minus you know mass or volume fraction sorry it is the volume fraction of the solid material unit volume of the bulk material. So one minus packing density gives me the void content in the aggregate system. So this void content should be minimum that means I should have best packing and good old days ideas of this packing densities were relatively less known because signs of particulate matter was not so well developed. So we talked in terms of when we understood of course it is understood by observation or empirical mean that if I add different proportions of you know different materials it packs better and appropriate proportions of each fraction of the each size fraction would make the packing better that is what we have seen while discussing about aggregate. Therefore grading of aggregate is an important issue grading of aggregate is an important issue grading means proportion corresponding to each size that was that is a very important issue. So aggregate grading of aggregate and we have also seen as I increase the maximum size of aggregate or number of sizes if I increase by packing density improves or the void system in the aggregate improves. So good grading higher MSA will always reduce down the void system in the aggregate and therefore my base content required for right kind of or appropriate kind of moldability or workability would be less. So it will make the concrete economy. So paste content or water content they were dependent on the grading of aggregate and maximum size of aggregate alright and also on shape of aggregate we mentioned earlier that rounded aggregate packs better. Therefore we will require lesser paste I repeat rounded aggregate packs better that is what we have seen when I talked about aggregate. Therefore we will require lesser paste for the same workability. So concrete would be economic for the same workability. The strength is not governed not by shape if anything governs it would be a structure of those aggregate but not by the shape shape governs the packing characteristics. So these are the factors which will dictate how much is my water required or paste required and for you know water required is decided on this aspect. Strength is mainly governed by water cement ratio or water to cement and fly ash ratios. Strength is largely governed by water cement ratio or water to cement and fly ash ratio. You know all others properties can be related to compressive strength all other properties can be related to compressive strength all other properties can be related to compressive strength. I mean all other mechanical properties empirically. For example empirically modulus of elasticity as we measure right elastic modulus used in design they can be related to compressive strength even flexural stencil strength can be empirically related to the compressive strength. So largely we design concrete for compressive strength only in special cases for tensile strength and water cement ratio governs this. Why does water cement ratio governs this? Because water cement ratio controls the porosity and pore sizes of cement paste we have seen even in concrete same thing happens. We have seen in the case of you know microstructure development of cement paste it is a water to cement ratio which governs the capillary porosity. Higher water cement ratio means more capillary porosity. Therefore strength of the concrete which is a function of the porosity and pore sizes of concrete is governed by water cement ratio. We shall see this in details sometime on when we talk of strength the factors affecting strength of concrete that time we shall see this and we will understand more about it. But at the moment we understand it is the water cement ratio which governs the strength of concrete and therefore or if we are adding some other supplementary cement ratio like flyers or let us say silica fume they you know the ratio of water to cement plus those ones would act like govern this. Now we also understand that deterioration process in concrete takes place through ingress of material from outside and again through those pores and interconnected pores. Therefore porosity governs the strength again I sorry durability again or deterioration again. So porosity governs the deterioration and therefore durability aspects are controlled to again water cement ratio or water cement to flyers ratio and grade of concrete etc. So water cement ratio is an important factor which governs the durability as well as strength because we are prescribing maximum water cement ratio. So mixed design procedure first thing is we determine actually water cement ratio from the strength requirement and durability requirement or durability requirement. Whichever you know gives me the higher value or lower value of water cement ratio that is what I will say. Let us see controlling one will be the lower value let us see the procedure then mixed design procedure then but before that just one more thing I would like to understand or rather I like to make clear is that I should design the system for minimum cost satisfying a set of specifications. So I am minimizing the cost therefore it is an optimization problem minimize the cost minimize cost it is you know minimize cost. This is a problem of optimization in fact in classical optimization problem we either maximize the profit or minimize cost or maximum gain minimum losses or whatever it is in classical optimization problem and I would have loved to formulate mixed design process as an optimization problem you know then I have a software and I am through with it just put on those data and you get the output as an optimization problem many many many many cases it is used many engineering problem you can use this optimization process mathematics have optimization is very well defined in mathematics. But to do that usually in an optimization process I will have some objective function or some objective like here the minimization of course and cost of each component of the material if I know then total cost I can always remember subject to certain constraint let us say my strength must be greater than specified strength slump must be greater than specified slump etc etc so these are certain specifications can be formed in terms of constraints why to say in case you know what we usually mention in case of classical optimization problem. So my specifications could have been constraints my objective could be minimization of the cost and I could have easily done an optimization process optimization you know process mathematically and it would be a very good thing very very easy situation but unfortunately we do not have well defined equations relating strength and mixed factors neither we have very well defined equations relating slump and mixed factors so well defined mathematical relationships are not available. In fact if you look at a book by Sandler-Popovix he has listed down as many as 50 plus equation of equation for slump of concrete related to various factors. Now what does it mean they cannot be general a general equation satisfying all the conditions would have been only one like one Newton's law can express or can be you know all all all most equations you know all motion or movement of or movement of you know moving bodies behavior of moving moving bodies can be expressed in terms of one general equation. We do not have such general equations for slump of concrete that is why there are 51 equations each was developed empirically for maybe for the specific condition of that particular experiment. So we do not have general equation therefore we cannot create it as an optimizations procedure. We do not have well defined relationship neither for strength not for workability and durability is out of question because we are only at the stage of prescriptive level. So what do we have empirical formulae and experience some empirical formulae not very general not very general but still some formulas available and experience of people. Therefore we cannot formulate it is a mathematical problem and if we even if we do it will be case principle. So use of very sophisticated softwares etc really does not make at the moment you know they are not they are not very much very much conducive in fact finally you have to make a trial so we must understand that mixed design procedure is largely empirical in nature and it is not only science it has got a large arts component a person who does mixed design day in day out for a given type of aggregate and cement system or various cement system in a particular locality. He will come out he or she will come out easily with a mixed proportion for any grade of concrete under that situation because experience is very very important very very important to the experiencing this at the moment because we do not have generalized relationship and materials varies from place to place and even from the same source if you are getting material you will find that the properties of the concrete there. So experience plays a very very strong role and mixed design procedure always involve some trial casting the mathematics or procedure mathematics is very little there is hardly anything the procedure involved is only looking at few charts and tables and coming at the proportion starting proportion but finally you will do several trials and come to the best. So it is more of an empirical sort of a procedure and therefore it is more of arts and you know the science is obvious with there but there is a good lot of arts is also involved and one must realize this right. So mixed design is more of an art together with the science part of it. Now let us understand the procedure to understand the procedure first thing I must understand is the nature of variation of concrete strength. Supposing I have a concrete strength I thought the mean strength would be somewhere let us say somewhere 28 days age I am talking of or you know at the moment let us say 28 days I had decided that it should have some kind of a mean strength of let us say 55 or so for this will be valid for anything any other mean strength also. I will find that if I test large number of cubes and plot a frequency diagram like this then good lot of majority will show the strength close to what I have actually conceived as a mean but possibly large number or 50 percent of the strength would be lower than that and 50 percent of the strength will be higher than that. This is because concrete strength cube concrete strength at the age of 20 days depends upon too many factors there are too many variables. For example it would depend upon the error in mixing proportionally first of all what do you call batching there would be some kind of varying batching you wanted to put 180 liters of water you might have your measurement system would have meant it to you know you might have put it around 180 instead of 185 or 190 instead of 185. There will be some tolerances about the actual quantity specified quantity of water you want to make. Similarly quantity of cement you wanted to put in let us say is 320 kg just of the cement you want to put you might add up actually 310 or 330 it is very difficult to put or ensure absolutely same quantity of cement time and again it will vary within certain tolerances allowable tolerances and therefore you can see that water cement ratio vary from a mix to the other mix. Even in the same mix the mixing procedure itself could add to variation. First 15 percent of the discharge from a mixer machine may not be exactly same as the last 15 percent of the discharge from the same mixer machine. So therefore there is a kind of variation strength variation that could occur because of mixing. Many other factors like aggregate in one batch might vary from the other batch aggregate in a given cube might vary from another cube which I have molded for testing. So therefore there are several such factors which go on the strength finally measured strength even the testing machine interaction with the machines you know every time the load it is showing there are some errors in load measurement there will be minor errors random errors. So there are too many random errors which control the strength of cube strength as measured and statistics tells us from central limit theorem that in such situation random variable which depends upon number of random variable will vary normally that means it will show exhibit a bell shaped curve as shown here it will exhibit a bell shaped curve as shown here the strength although I wanted to be 55 it will actually vary from 45 to 65 or 67 to 43 to 67 and therefore there is a range over which it varies. Hence when I specify my strength my specification of strength actually goes in terms of you know this variation is normally distributed and average represents what is called mean and it will have some kind of dispersion about this mean. Just if you recall that we defined you know and this this also comes from statistics that whole of this area under this curve if I consider to be one then 50 percent of the curve is on this side 50 percent of the curve is on this side in other words 50 percent of the result should be above this mean which is the average and 50 percent of the result will be below the mean 50 percent will be above the mean 50 percent will be below the now we have defined our characteristic strength is that strength which would be accident by 95 percent of the cubes therefore I must define my character 6th step accordingly now this is what we will do in the next lecture. So to sum up what we have discussed with how do we specify the concrete how do we specify the concrete for mix design purpose three issues we have looked into one is the stress stress properties which you said is slump is most common then we looked at the strength properties and then we also specify it in terms of durability requirements which are prescriptive like maximum water cement ratio limit is given minimum cement content etc etc and then we just try to say why this you know little bit of why and what are the what are the factors in the mixed proportion that govand is property. For example, we said water content or paste content will govand the slump fresh concrete water cement ratio will govand both the strength and durability. Therefore from the strength we would like to fix the durability from the strength we would like to fix the water cement ratio and from durability we will try to fix the water cement ratio whichever gives me the lower water cement ratio that is what I will select and from the slump requirement etc I will fix the water content or paste content we should see that in the next class. So start with I just started about how do you decide how do you define to start with how do you define the grade of concrete and in the next lecture we will start from here we will start from here from the grade of concrete and then overall mix with the end procedure will you know will will explain followed by some of those thank you very much. === Lecture 14 Transcript === Welcome to lecture 3 module 4. So, you will recall that in the last lecture we looked into the Indian Standard method of mixed design. We will continue to look at that with an example now and then we will start with British DOE method. So, what general outline of this lecture is IS method, example and the British practice of Department of Environment DOE method. So, just to recall the last when we discussed we said that if you are using fly ash, if you are using fly ash in with cement the IS method IS 10262 method. When fly ash is used it is suggested it is recommended that you increase the cement plus C plus F should be C dash plus F should be 1.1 C where C is the cement content without fly ash and if you are using fly ash increase that cement content by 10 percent and that must be the sum of the cement plus fly ash content. So, if you know F divided by C dash plus F we have decided let us say to use this as 20 percent fly ash in the system. Then from this two equation you can find out the fly ash and cement content itself using this two equation one is that increase the total by 10 percent. So, 1.1 C you have have a control mix without the fly ash which will have a cement content of C kg per meter cube. Now, if it is let us say is 320 was the C then C dash plus F will be let us say something like 352 or so. Somewhere close to this you can approximately take that guideline. So, if you know F by C dash plus F you can find out the value of C dash and F where C dash is the new cement content and F is the fly ash content that you are using in the concrete. So, this is just to recall what we are last discussing. We also said that we need some correction factor for moisture content at the field and in our example we will look into this issues. So, right now we will look into an example using right now we will look into an example we using you know through IS method. So, the example is we are assuming I mean we are choosing an M 25 grade of concrete we are assuming M 25 grade of concrete. cement we are using OPC cement we are using OPC and assuming moderate exposure moderate exposure as per IS code is concerned zone zone 3 sand. Sram is 80 millimeter normal strength concrete and 20 millimeter MSA rounded aggregate 20 millimeter MSA rounded aggregate that we are using. So, IS method we will use to find this out now you recall that in IS method first step is to find out the mean strength and target mean strength as we call it F M is equals to F C K plus 1.65 sigma that was the first step if you remember in IS method and since you know we do not have any data available let us say the start to find out starting point we are taking standard deviation as 4 MPa standard deviation as given in IS 456 2000 or in 10262. So, I have standard deviation as 4 sigma as 4 grade strength is 25 MPa my target mean strength if I calculate out based on this formula based on this formula then I get equals to 31.6. So, I choose a mean strength of 32 MPa and design the concrete. So, first step was to find out the mean strength because as we said in the last class that I can I can get an estimate of the mean strength through my cubes test results very easily with say samples by testing samples, but F C K I cannot get directly then you need to test large number of samples which is not very easy to do. So, therefore, we design the concrete mix for target mean strength and the mean strength is we have found out is 32 MPa. Then it says that you use the water content from experience or if nothing is available so either from experience, either from experience, fast experience if it is available or from table 5 of IS 456 2000 you know from durability requirement. This is the table which gives the durability requirement this table is IS 456 2000 durability requirement table durability and table and if you see the prescriptions those are given for various exposure condition mild moderate CBR, very CBR and extreme. The Indian standard code IS 456 2000 has actually classified the exposure environment into this 5 classes namely mild moderate CBR, very severe, very severe and extreme and correspondingly the prescribed minimum cement content and maximum water cement ratio and minimum grade of concrete are given in this table. This table is reproduced from IS 456 2000. Now, I also mentioned in our problem, R D a problem if you look at it our exposure condition was our exposure condition was moderate exposure. Therefore, for moderate exposure, moderate exposure if I look at into this table, for moderate exposure if I look at into this table then the one which is colored blue minimum cement content is 300, maximum water cement ratio is 0.5 and the minimum grade of concrete is 25. So, we are doing design for M 25 therefore, these are the relevant one M 25 and this is the maximum water cement ratio permissible and this is minimum cement content permissible. However, from experience I take the water cement ratio is 0.45, deliberately just as an example supposing I feel that well 0.5 I may not be able to get 32 MPM mean strength, I put it as 0.45. So, these are the two cases either I take this or this. Now, since my experience says I shall be taking this, so water cement ratio star is 0.45. What I am saying is the water cement ratio I will be using is 0.45 whichever is smaller, so I am using 0.45. Then next is estimate water content from table 2 of 10262. So, this table gives us the water content in kg per meter cube of concrete depending upon MSA and I am using MSA 20 mm. So, this is my thing I should use a water content of this. So, therefore, this is the line. So, 20 mm MSA prescribed as we have seen earlier in the beginning and therefore, my starting water content is 186. Now, this is meant for the slump of 25 to 50 and crushed coarse agree. So, I must apply some correction factor. This correction factors are this because this table was for angular coarse aggregate and slump of 25 to 50. For each increase in slump of 50 millimeter or fraction there of I will increase the water content by 3 percent. So, I increase 186 by multiplied by 1.03. My aggregate is rounded. So, I subtract because this is minus for rounded aggregate since the pack better the packing is better. So, they consume less water in the mix for the same more capability. Right paste content will be less packing better. So, therefore, minus 25. So, my water content therefore, would be 186 into 1.03 minus 0.25 minus 25 which will give me 167. With a water to cement ratio of 0.45. So, cement will be 167 divided by 0.45. Now, this will be my control mix if I am not using any super plasticizer or plasticizer. If I decide to use plasticizer my water content will reduce. Let us say if I decide to use super plasticizer I can reduce my water by 25 percent which means my water will be simply 75 percent of this. So, basically you will have if I use a super plasticizer at the moment in this example I am not considering super plasticizer. But if I intend to use super plasticizer I can reduce it by 25 percent by using appropriate quantity of appropriate dosage of compatible super plasticizer. So, 0.75 of this will be 167 minus 4 or 41 less you can say. So, this will be 5. So, about 125 or 126 liter per meter cube of water I can use. The cement also therefore, will become 126 divided by 0.45. So, I can reduce my water which will be you know some something like if you can see this you know 3.15 or 3 will be 42. So, this is 14. 14 by 14 by this would be you know 42, 42 divided by 42 you know if I divide it by 9. So, I get 0.05 and 14. So, 1,400 divided by 5 is 280 kg. So, I could use 280 kg of cement if you are using super plasticizer and reducing down the water content by 25 percent. Because my water would become water would change from water would change from water would change from 167 to 0.7575 into 167. Just let us see how it is this is for our control or just just let us look at it just let us look at it first the calculation part of it then we will come back again. So, first of all what we are saying is that 167 was the water use super plasticizer W will become 0.75 W 0.75 into 0.75 into 167 and that was equals to 126 liras a kg per meter cube. So, cement will be 126 divided by 4.5 which will be approximately equals to 280 kg per meter cube. So, you see you have a saving in cement as well 280 water is less cement is less anyway that is why I just I wanted to show that if you use super plasticizer for the same workability you can same one to the cement, which we have seen earlier when we are talking about admixtures. So, which we have seen earlier when we are talking about admixtures. Now, in this particular case for the control mix however your water is 167 cement is 3 72 kg per meter cube but if you use a super plasticizer this will become 280 this will become 1 meter cube. So, that is why when we start Now, in this particular case for the control mix however, your water is 167, cement is 70, 372 kg per meter kilo. But if you use a super plus to size it, this will become 280, this will become 126 or something like that. So, anyway this is how we do the select our water content. Now we got our water content and we have also got our water cement ratio. We will come to this later on. Now, from the table 4, we can estimate the quartz aggregate volume in total volume by aggregate. And we said that our sand was zone 3. So, this is our zone 3 sand, we are using MSA 20. Therefore, this will be this is not correct. So, if I am using 0.485 using MSA 10, but if I am using 20, then it is 0.64. So, if I am using 0.2T, 20 it is there. If I want it to be pumpable which is not there at the moment, then I can reduce it by 10 percent. But at the moment I have said it is 80 slump concrete only. So, there is no question of pumpability. So, in my case therefore, this would be 6.64 with MSA 20. So, MSA 10 it will be 48, MSA 20 it is 0.64. So, my calculation should be done on the basis of 0.64. So, what are two cement ratios? The minimum of these two, minimum of these two and is 0.45, minimum of this two and is 0.45. We found out what are is 167 kg. That is 167 divided by 0.45 or 300 from the durability requirement. So, maximum of these two and is gives me 372 kg per meter. So, control concrete without plus 3 size R has got 372 kg of cement content and water cement ratio 0.45. Now, based on this 372 I can find out because we have chosen this as 0.64 and chosen this as 0.64 because for 20 mm zone 3 sand, zone 3 sand we got aggregate is in the total aggregate course aggregate is 6. So, fine aggregate will be 1 minus 0.64. So, fraction of fine aggregate will be. So, the total aggregate if I want to find out divide the fine aggregate mass divided by specific gravity and divide this by 1 minus 0.64 that must be equals to you know. So, this is the volume of water this divided by 1000 this divided by 3.15 and 1000 gives me the volume of cement. This gives me the volume of total aggregate because this is the mass of fine aggregate and fine aggregate occupies a volume of 1 minus 0.64. So, if I divide this by 1 minus 0.64 that will be the total volume of aggregate. So, fine aggregate divided by specific gravity gives me the volume of fine aggregate divided by the you know this term gives me the total volume of the total aggregate. So, fine aggregate quantity I can find out from this and it comes out to be 695. KG per meter cube. Now, course aggregate I can calculate from the same formula only thing it will be C course aggregate divided by 0.64 and specific gravity of course aggregate is 2.6. So, on that basis I get course aggregate is equals to 1190. So, my control mix without super plus this is are and without flyers or anything you know the mix without flyers or plus plus this is are I may not say this is a control mix. This will be a control mix if I am using a flyers or using a super plus this is are then I have to find out change this mix design for the super plus this is are and for the flyers as well. You know we will just we will just do this calculation as well quickly or at least show the steps. So, the water is 167 fine aggregate is 695 and course aggregate is 1190 KG per meter cube. Now, if I was using flyers super plus this is are then W will become for super plus this size of W will become 126 this will become 280 and correspondingly then this you can find out from this formula 1 is equals to 126 plus 280 divided by 3.15 plus fine F AGG divided by 1 minus 0.64 into 2.7. So, using this formula you can find out F AGG fine aggregate content this is unknown and course aggregate correspondingly one can find out as 126 one is equals to 126 plus 280 divided by 3.15 plus course aggregate content divided by 2.6 into 0.64 and this equation you can use to find out course aggregate content. So, therefore, you will find that this value is higher greater than this it will increase now and this will also increase and correspondingly you have you can find out when you are using super plus this size. If you are using flyers if you are using flyers if you are using flyers then let us see what will happen if you use flyers say you decided to use 25 percent of flyers that is F divided by C plus F is equals to 0.25 this is what you have decided to use. So, your cement new cement dash plus F will be equals to 1.1 into 372 which will mean another 38 increase so it will become 400 approximately it will become 400 and you have decided to use let us say 25 percent so that is you know F divided by C plus F is equals to 0.25 and let me raise this out again do it like that you know if I decided to use F divided by F divided by C plus F is equals to 0.25 c dash plus F is equals to 0.25 which is equals to 400 you know so C plus F is equals to 400 so F divided by 400 is equals to 0.25. So, F will be equals to 100 F will be equals to 100 the cement will be 300 so C dash will be 300 C dash will be so F new F will be so if you are using flyers if you are using flyers this can remain same in fact it will reduce down plus delta w which IS code is not giving but there will be some reduction this will become 300 and flyers will become 100. So, you are getting a saving in cement and correspondingly this also you can find out but in the equation the volume equation you will have now flyers divided by specific gravity of flyers as well. So, fine aggregate will also reduce this will reduce somewhat this will also reduce somewhat because volume flyers will occupy more volume cement will occupy less volume but flyers plus cement together will occupy more volume because quantity is now 400 10 percent increase. So, 300 divided by 300 divided by 300 divided by 300 150 plus 100 divided by 2.2. So, flyers and cement will occupy more volume then the volume that was occupied by cement earlier and now you will have therefore, lesser fine aggregate lesser coarse aggregate. I have not shown you this calculations with flyers as per IS makes this concern but one can easily adopt this one can easily adopt this the calculation I am not I mean I have just roughly try to show you the calculation not the complete calculation let me do it again let me do it again let me do it again let me do it again because our c was 372. So, c dash plus f c dash is the new flyers cement content will be 372 into 1.1 approximately 400 because 38 you will add to this and you get 400. Now, f by c dash plus f i set is 0.25 therefore, f must be equals to 0.25 into 400 which makes it equals to 100. So, volume occupied by flyers should be this divided by you know so, this is flyers is this. So, cement volume will be now volume of volume cement you know so, therefore, this is f is 100. So, now my new new situation becomes new situation becomes c dash is equals to 300 f is equals to 100 w is equals to 167 which might reduce a little bit. So, I will set an equation like this one is equals to 1 is equals to 167 plus 300 divided by 3.15 plus f divided by f is 100 and specific revenue let us say is 2.2. So, 100 divided by 2.2 by fine aggregate divided by 2.7 into 0.36 and whole of this things should be divided by 1000 and I will find out the fly aggregate content from this and it will be less than 695. It will be less than 695 and if I put in coarse aggregate here divide this by 0.64 I will find out coarse aggregate content which will also be less now total aggregate will be less now total aggregate content will be less and fine. So, therefore, you see there is a if you use flyers it is just not replacing it is not just not replacing the flyers by you know some of the cement by flyers you are not doing that actually. Flyers addition will reduce down the sand requirement or fine aggregate requirement as well as the coarse aggregate requirement also it will reduce down also it will reduce down the cement requirement even if we keep the water content safe. But if the flyers is good it can reduce down the it has got sufficient fines in the system sphericity spherical particle it can in fact reduce down the water requirement also and save on further cement. So, if you use together flyers and compatible super plasticizer you can reduce down the cement content even more. So, 300 if you use flyers alone 280 if you use a super plasticizer but it will be much much less let us say 25 percent less than the amount that you are using you know. So, 126 liters with the flyers 126 liters with the flyers the water cement ratio is for one you know we can you can actually reduce down still more the cement content and that is of course anyway right now I mean one can understood from whatever our discussion has been. So, this is up to this we determine the mix design mix proportions and let us us see how we do the total is 2425 kg per meter cube. So, in 1 meter cube the yield will be 242425 kg per meter cube by sum up all this masses sum up all this masses. But while transporting and mixing you know mix after mixing while transporting in fact sum over water evaporates you will get it somewhat less. Then some loss both due to reaction autogenous you know desiccation auto desiccation and evaporation then this mass will become somewhat less. So, otherwise this should be the mass of the concrete at the first state. If you have now site correction would be site correction there will be some site correction because water content at the site would be less water content the aggregate will be somewhat less I mean somewhat more. So, there has to be some correction at the site. So, if the measure water content is known if you know if you remember if the let us say water content of aggregate is W A G G S S D absorption is W S S D right. So, excess water would be you know this let us say for the coarse aggregate fine aggregate let us say is negligible water absorption and there is no water in the site as well. If they if there you have to subtract this. So, this is W A G G minus if this is greater if it is if you know like if it is greater so, W A G G minus W S S D is the moisture content content per unit dry mass dry mass per unit S S D mass. So, this is the additional water right additional water and this additional water multiplied by the C A G G C A G G mass of the aggregate coarse aggregate mass this must be added to the water content this quantity of water is additional water this must be added and correspondingly you must add aggregate as well because aggregate content is additional moisture. If it is less moisture then less moisture you might add some water slightly more water should be added because a good lot of it will be absorbed to bring it to the S S D condition and the aggregate quantity that you are adding that should be less than the actual measured aggregate quantity because in excess the condition mass will be higher. So, accordingly one might do this correction. So, that is about that is all about the mixed design method as per IS code is concerned as per IS 1 0 1 0 2 6 2 is concerned. So, with this now we can look into DOE method we can look into the DOE method and DOE method starting point is same step 1 is same. Of course, the next step is I am calling this not as a step 1, but step 1 then is selection of water cement ratio from curves. Step 2 is then estimate water content based on slum, bb time etcetera M S A and shape of aggregate from a table. So, this is what we you know this is a slightly different table and step 3 is calculate cement content which you can do because you know the water cement ratio and you know the water content. So, step 3 you can do step 4 would be wet density of concrete that is again from a set of curves and total aggregate content you can determine them. Step 5 is determination of fine aggregate based on M S A water to cement ratio and grading zone of sand from a set of curves. So, let me just repeat this first is target min strength same as I S code. Next you select water cement ratio from a set of curves how you do it will come back to this. Then you determine the water content from a table depending upon the slump or bb there is workability factor and depending upon M S A maximum size of aggregate and whether it is a rounded or crushed aggregate based on that. So, you determine water content you have determined the cement content. Now, next step is to next step is to determine the aggregate content that is done from a set of curves which gives wet density of concrete versus wet density of concrete versus water content. Since you know the water content and specific gravity of the aggregate you can find out the wet density. So, if you know the wet density subtract the volume of cement from that or cement mass of cement from that mass of water from that you get the total mass of aggregate. Proportion of course, to fine can be obtained from again a set of curves where you gives you the proportions of fines depending upon water cement ratio grading zone etcetera etcetera. So, these are the step 5 and then site corrections are all required. So, these are step 5 steps which I mentioned. So, first staggered means strength I am not discussing anymore because we have already talked about it when we are talking of IS method. We look into water cement ratio determination. This is the kind of curve where you plot free water cement ratio free water cement ratio means the water that is available for free water you know water water that is available for reaction that is after SSD condition after absorption to SSD condition. So, this is free water cement ratio against compressive strength at 28 days 8 days let us say. So, this is a strength versus compressive strength versus water cement ratio relationship. So, 20 days compressive strength you can find out, but now there are infinite number of curves here. So, you should start you should select a curve how do you select? You start with water cement ratio 0.5 and DOE method gives you a very large table. Therefore, various types of cement and type aggregate type the possible strength at 0.5 water cement ratio are given. So, for example, OPC and SRC sulphate resisting cement if you have crushed aggregate you might assume that to be 40 MPa for uncrushed aggregate it you might assume the strength to be 47 MPa right for same water cement ratio 47 MPa because this is largely because crushed aggregate packing related issues. So, it gives you 47. However, such thing will be valid for only UK condition this may not be valid in Indian scenario. So, if you are or any other scenario. So, if you want to start you need not rely on this table same method you can use because it is also based on cube strength and same thing FCK plus 1.65 sigma same. So, use the same concepts which use in IS code, but you cast a trial mix with 0.5 water cement ratio with your cement with your aggregate etcetera. Atrial mix you cast with 0.5 water cement ratio. So, starting point will be at 0.5 water cement now supposing you have done that and obtained a strength of let us say 20 25 also you know somewhere like this 25 strength you got. So, 25 also and now with 0.5 water cement ratio you got 25. Therefore, you can select your curve with 0.5 water cement ratio if you have got 30 a curve would have been this, but right now you have got this therefore, your curve would be something like this this is the curve you know this is the curve. So, because you have got 25 ampere so, correspondingly you can select the curve you can always keep the lower curve if you have got somewhere in between make it a conservative little bit conservative. So, this is how you select your curve strength versus water cement ratio curve. Now, supposing your target min strength is 32 or 30 40 target min strength is 40 then the water cement ratio would be or 32 same as before. The water cement ratio would be in this curve draw a line at 32 and this will be your water cement ratio close to 0.45 close to 0.45 it is same as the example that I have taken actually deliberately taken that way. So, therefore, you can find out your water cement ratio in this manner let me repeat first you cast a trial mix first you cast a trial mix first you cast a trial mix with 0.5 water cement ratio determine the 28 day strength you can even accelerated test you can do, but this is to be done only once you know for your system later on you may not do for one any grade of concrete this is done with the same results you can use it for any grade of concrete for example, M 25 M 30 M 40 you can design it for any grade of concrete. So, you have got let us say with 0.5 water cement ratio the strength somewhere here which is about 25, but you want to get around 32 strength. So, this helps you in identifying the curve. So, a trial test at 0.5 water cement ratio helps you identifying the curve which you should be using otherwise there are too many curves you do not know which curve to be used. So, you find out which curve you want to use and then find out which curve you want to use then go to your target mean strength do a horizontal line up to that curve. So, this was my curve and up to this point and this I project downward to get the water cement ratio. So, which I got around 0.45. So, water cement ratio can be determined in this manner. So, the step next step is to determine the water content. Well, this curves can be also put into equation form that is what we have done actually because these are hyperbolic curves and you can fit it in this form a k 1 plus k 2 to the power w by c is something similar to Abrams law which says a by b to the power water w by c. So, k 2 is nothing but b to the power minus 1 Abrams 1 stone you know. So, this one can fit into this curve and if one fits into this curve it has been observed that k 1 can be related to k 1 can be related to log of 0.5 strength. So, each curve therefore, so many curves for each curve if you know the 0.5 strength you can find out k 1 and similarly k 2 you can find out this has been done a regression analysis we have done and we have found out that k 1 can be related to log of 0.5 point 5 strength for f f 0.5 and k 2 can also be related like this. So, if you know 0.5 strength you can actually find out k 1 and k 2 and therefore, you can know for any other water cement ratio what is the strength this is doing it in an equation form because instead of using the chart this becomes very useful if you are doing it in Microsoft excel or any other spreadsheet. Next step would be to determine the water content. Next step would be to determine the water content and water content determination is based on a table. I have actually taken I have reproduced the part of the table. Reproduce the part of the table it gives you slum also BB time I have not written the BB time part of the table I said slum. So, for various MSA 10 mm 20 mm 40 mm for uncrossed and crossed aggregate it gives you the water content for various slums for example, in our case it was 80 mm slum we would have used possibly 195 kg per meter cube of water 195 kg per meter cube of water which is I S code gave us 167 you know if you go through that example here we would have used 195 kg for uncrossed aggregate this rounded aggregate, but if it is cross then this would be more this would be more right. So, 40 mm this is less and so on so forth. So, one can find out the water content from this table no correction required then calculate the cement content. Now, cement content will be minimum of water cement ratio from the curve water cement ratio sorry water cement ratio should be minimum of water cement ratio from the curve and water cement ratio from durability. So, again if this was 0.45 this is 0.5 I will choose 0.45 only. If you have coarse aggregate and fine aggregate one of them is crushed other is not crushed one of coarse aggregate is crushed and fine aggregates are not crushed let us say natural then you take 2 third water for fine aggregate one third for coarse aggregate. So, for example, this is let us say is 195 this is 225. So, just go back to this table you go to back to this table this is 195 for crushed it is 225. So, if my coarse aggregate is crushed and fine aggregate is uncrossed then the moisture content I mean water content of the mix will be the water content of the mix will be water content of the mix will be 2 third of the fine aggregate. So, 2 third of 195 and 1 third of that for coarse aggregate. So, that is how I go about it and therefore, 2 third 2 by 2 by 3 195 plus 2 to 1 third 225 which will work out to be 130 plus 75. So, which will make it 5 205 kg per meter cube. So, it will be 205 kg per meter cube. If course is but it will depend upon how what type of aggregates you have. So, water cement ratio would in our case would come now actually 0.45 if you go from that figure and cement content will be maximum of water content divided by water cement ratio star which is 0.45 and in this case this was 225 or 195 and c c from durability c from durability c from durability which is 300 kg. So, whichever is higher you take that. Next would be step would be to determine the aggregate content. Now, we know the cement content we know the water content we go to determine the aggregate content. This is done from a figure like this where free water content is plotted you know the wet density of concrete is plotted again free water content. For various specific gravities of various specific gravities of aggregate for various specific gravities of aggregate. So, you know specific gravities of your combined aggregate specific gravity you can find out because you know the combined graining the proportions and all that and you know your free water cement ratio. Let us say if it is 195 it will be somewhat here and if you know the type of aggregate or aggregate specific gravity then you can take this as let us say 2450 or something like this. So, you can find out the wet density. So, you know the wet density of concrete and kg per meter cube you know the mass of the cement in 1 meter cube mass of the water in the same 1 meter cube therefore, rest of it must be the aggregates. So, this is the principle that is applied right. So, for example, mine was 190 or 195 and this was my specific gravity let us say then this will be my you know water content to sorry wet density will be somewhere around 2450. Just for an example, supposing this is 190 this is you know 180 190 and this is the crushed aggregate and so on so forth and you are getting 2450. Calculate the total aggregate content will be the next step continue with the step 4 total aggregate content is due wet density mass of the aggregate total aggregate is equals to wet density minus c minus w where c is the cement content w is the water content right. So, we know cement content because we know the water cement ratio and we know the water content you know in this particular case I was telling you it would be 195 divided by 0.45 is a c and water is 195. So, this would be 66 and 0.15. So, this would be 22 divided by 0.05. So, 22 divided by 0.05 is 2225 which will be 450 no no no no 440. So, 440 will be the amount of cement you require in this particular case because 195 divided by 0.45. But if you use plasticizer you can reduce this 195 by 20 25 percent those cement consumption will also go down. So, that is how we find out now the last step in this DOE method is determination of fine aggregate based on. So, you have curves like this determination of fine aggregate you have set of curves like this you can see there are 4 curves this is for slum 10 to 0 to 10 mm this for 10 to 30 13 to 60 and 60 to 180 and this curve is for 20 millimeter aggregate x axis is free water free water cement ratio y axis is proportion of fine aggregate in total aggregate by mass proportion of fine aggregate in total aggregate by mass. So, if I know my wet density was 2450 let us say 2450 water was 195 just for the sake of understanding and cement was 440. So, the aggregate content will be some total of this two which is 5 635. So, 2450 minus 635 is 15 1835 would have been the aggregate content total aggregate content out of which how much is the fine aggregate content that will depend upon the proportions of fine aggregate by mass in total aggregate. So, this is proportion by mass and this depends upon what is my slum. Supposing my slump is 6 to 180 and 20 mm aggregate I am using and my water cement ratio is 0.45 or something and I have got a zone 3 sand. So, somewhere or zone 3 or zone 2 sand somewhere here. So, therefore, I know it is about 30 percent let us say by weight. So, out of 30 percent just let us say 30 percent. So, this will be 545 you know you can find out 30 percent of this right. So, 540 somewhere on 545 kg would be the fine aggregate depending upon which zone does it belong to etcetera. In fact, which range does it belong to and which range does it belong to which range does it belong to and this is given here. For example, the zone 1 is for percentage passing through the 600 micron sieve 15 percent. So, if it is percentage passing through the 600 micron sieve that is grading of the fine sand is such that percent is 600 micron you know percent 600 micron sieve is 15 percent 2 is 40 percent 3 is 60 percent and 5 is 100 percent. Now, if it is passing through the 600 micron that is the quantity of real fine in the system or it is grading. The zone 5 that is the range that is shown as 5 the carbon number 5 sorry the carbon number 5 this is carbon 1, carbon 2, carbon 3, carbon 4, carbon 5. So, carbon 5 corresponds to a very fine sand whereas, carbon 1 corresponds to relatively coarser sand only 15 percent is below 600 micron rest of it is above 600 micron. So, therefore, fine content increases as we have coars material in the system because that then coarsethe aggregate will reduce fine content will increase. When fine is very fine then you have got maximum amount of fine to use and this also depends upon the slum for a higher slum you need more fines lesser coarset aggregate this understandable because as I told you coarset aggregate do not contribute to moldability right it is the paste and then the mortar and their flowability contribute to the workability. So, therefore, this is step 5 and this is meant for 20 mm similar crops are available for 10 mm and 40 mm as well this is for 20 mm as I so, by doing this then you have found out the complete you know proportion of fine quartz because you know the proportion mass of actually W fine aggregate F A G G divided by total aggregate W F A G G plus W C A G G both some total is in the left vertical axis. Therefore, total aggregate content you have found out by subtracting the cement content and water content from wind density wind density you have found out from the curve and then once you have found out the total aggregate content proportions of the fine in the total is known if the sand is finer and you need higher slum you will put more sand right and it will also depend upon the M S A higher the M S A you will require less sand because packing of the coarset aggregate will become better and then it also depends upon water cement ratio because cement contributes to the fine as well cement contributes to the fine so higher water to cement ratio means you know higher water to cement ratio means you will be using more cement as well. So, depending upon that situation fine materials it will depend upon that so, all put together this curve gives you the quantity of fines. Cards are available for 10 mm and 40 mm as well. So, you calculate the fine aggregate content as fine aggregate content is equals to P W which you have obtained from the previous curve multiplied by W A G G where W A G G is the total aggregate content and P W is determined from the previous curve. So, C A G G is equals to W A G G minus fine aggregate content. So, you have found out the total proportion of material in the concrete without fly ash and without super plasticizer if you are using fly ash then this is the method available if you are using super plasticizer then reduce down the water content and rest of will work in the same manner as you have done it for I S method. If you use fly ash first you prepare that calculate for the control mix and then calculate the proportions for the fly ash mix. So, total percentage of pulverized fuel ash fly ash is a pulverized fuel ash or maybe just a fuel ash may not pulverize this. So, is fixed as specified or desired. So, how much fly ash you would be using that has to be fixed by yourself like we did even in I S system as well. So, this is known to us and water content would be reduced because fly ash acts like a or fuel ash acts like a kind of you know it gives you better packing. Therefore, as we have discussed this we have discussed in module 3 when you are talking of supplementary cementitious material this fly ash would reduce down your water requirement because it is spherical and the fine fly ash that is your very well and this method actually allows for reduction in water content. So, delta w is the water reduction new water content will be W dash. So, this water content reduction is given in a table and part of the table is here actually. So, depending upon the fly ash content percentage in the total material the and also the slump range the delta w the water content reduction delta w you know is given here. For example, if you have 20 mm MSA you have slump of 60 to 180 and if you are using pulverized fuel ash then you can reduce the water content by 15. So, if you have 195 you can make it 180 and so on so forth. So, you can reduce it down. So, your water get reduced if you are using fly ash. What happens to the cement how do you modify the cement? It suggests that you modify the cement content in this manner. First you find the p is given by c divided by c dash plus f into 100. So, f can be written from this because f can be expressed in terms of p and f will be written as p by 100 right. So, f divided by c dash plus f is given by p by 100. So, f is equals to c dash plus f into 100 p by 100 and you want to separate out f. So, you will get f equals to 1 minus p divided by 100, 1 minus p divided by 100, 1 minus p divided by 100 is equals to c dash into p by 100. So, f can be found out which is given in this equation that means c dash divided by p right and this can be written as 100 minus 100 divided by 100. So, 100 will cancel out. So, you will get this expression for f in terms of p, you will get expression for f in terms of p, you will get expression of f in terms of p and w c dash star is you put you know this is for the control and you write that is equivalent to an equivalent water content where you use a factor called k factor which gives us which gives us the amount of reduction which gives us the you know a factor which is less than 1 and gives us the equivalent cement of flyers. For example, if k is 0.3 100 kg of flyers is equivalent to 30 kg of cement 0.3 into 100. So, if flyers multiplied by this is equivalent cement. So, this is equivalent water cement ratio therefore, c dash can be obtained from this equation because w by c star is known p is known. So, combining this to equation you can get c dash from this equation which you can calculate out because this is equals to you know just f is equals to p c dash by 100 and p. So, replace f here and you will get this equation 100 minus p into w dash divided by 100 minus 0.7 p into w by w by c star where k is taken as 0.3. So, take k as 0.3 c dash equation will be this k 3 is a conservative value, but as a first approximation it says that take k as 0.3. In fact, in practical situation in India some cases it is the observation that k could be as close as 0.6 0.7 in some place of course, it could be lower. So, k 0.3 is quite conservative and that is why I scored did not end up this kind of a principle instead it decided to take about 10 percent increase in the total cementitious. So, that is how we find out for durability find out the water to cement ratio that is allowed and in that case no k is used. Right. So, this but only thing is it says that maximum p the p that you can use would be as per the criteria of IS 1489 part 1 which is you know the IS 1481 allows for maximum fly S limits the maximum fly S that can be used in Portland, Posil and Ocimate. So, p should not cross this limit if you are using in this formula and this true for IS method as well. So, maximum water to C plus F instead of maximum water content this we will discuss again when you talk of durability. So, this is from durability criteria and C plus F when density is as you same as control mix follow the same procedure only fly S will be now reduced and finally, aggregate content is calculated as before. So, using DS doing method you can also obtain a mix design using fly S as I told you procedure is by the same 5 get the control mix and then you know you get the fly S content etcetera only thing is it uses a k factor now IS code does not use k factor and k suggested k is around point 3. So, to summarize we have now looked into an example of IS code you have looked into DOE method and in this DOE method we have also looked into mix design with pFA that is pulverized poins less or fly S etcetera etcetera. So, with this we conclude the module 4 lecture 3 thank you very much. === Lecture 15 Transcript === Welcome to module 4. Lecture 4 of Concrete Technology. And today we shall be discussing ACI-211 method, mixed design of concrete. So, we have earlier discussed the Indian code 10262 method and then having discussed the department of environment British practice which is quite close to the Indian method. Now, we can look into ACI-211 method. So, generally we will discuss this and some example we will take. Now, of course, although I am writing this is step 1. If you look at the ACI-211 report, the step 1 is stated to be the determination of slum. And step 2 is given as determination of maximum size of aggregate. Now, these two are similar to the earlier method and if we are doing it by Indian method or in India using the ACI method, then we shall be actually using the IS method or IS 4562000 guideline for specifying the slum or fixing the slum and fixing the nominal maximum size of aggregate. Having done that, next is the step 1 part of it which will be actually step 3 in the ACI method or ACI report 211. But here I am calling them as step 1. So, that is actually estimation of mixing water, estimation of mixing water and that we do from a table, which is given below, that we do from a table which is given below. This table has got two parts. First part is related to first part is related to you know the mixing water and second part gives you the amount of air and treatment. So, you determine the air content, amount of air content. So, determine amount of air content and mixing water together from two tables, one is for non-air and trained concrete, another is for air and trained concrete. For example, this table if you look at it, the amount of water depends on slum, this is of course, we have taken in centimeter, I mean 1 inch to inch. So, corresponding to this, in fact ACI 211 gives you now, SI everything in SI unit as well together with the US customer unit. So, slum we have written in centimeter and maximum size of aggregate corresponding to this amount of water for non-air and trained concrete is given. And you can recollect in both the other methods we discussed earlier, the max the amount of water has been a function of the MSA, the required workability in terms of slump and BB etc. And also of course, the shape of the aggregate. So, here it is given in terms of the MSA and non-air and trained concrete and air and trained concrete will have some amount of difference in water requirement. That is because air and treatment although its main purpose is related to freeze-throw resistance, improves the workability somehow, makes it plastic, makes the concrete a little bit more plastic, therefore, you know, more flowable, therefore, water required to be somewhat different. So, non-air and trained concrete these are the values given for slum from 2.5 to 5 centimeter that is 25 and 50 mm and as your aggregate size increases, you can see that water content reduces and as your slump increases water content increases again. So, it is a principle is same, idea is same, after all it is the same kind of concrete only. And water content is what you can find out in the beginning. For air and trained concrete, this values water content are somewhat less because as I said air and training meant and to improve the workability. Therefore, if you see this is 181 for air and trained concrete for non-air and trained concrete, the same value is for non-air and trained concrete same value was 207. So, the water content for air and trained concrete is much much less and as you increase your slump water content increases. This was 243 for non-air and trained concrete for air and trained concrete, this is 216 and as you go along this direction, reduces. So, this is the first step if you know the slump and MSA then this will be the first step. So, you determine your water content for the given MSA and given slum. Then air content corresponding air contents are given for non-air and trained concrete. Typically, you can take the air and trained air content in percentage, percentage is 3 percent of the total volume 2 percent, 1.5 percent and 1 percent for MSA, increasing from 9.5 mm size to 37.5 mm size. That means, higher the higher the you know bigger the MSA, more the MSA packing is better. So, your air content reduces down, paste would be reducing. So, air content actually reduces down and that is what is given for non-air and trained concrete. For air and trained concrete, however, this will be much higher and that will depend upon that will be much higher and that will depend upon the dosage of the air and trained men. Now, this is suggested that minimum air content recommended air content for different exposure condition. For extreme exposure condition, you know this air entrain meant should be 7.5 to 5.5 depending upon MSA and for mild exposure it is 4.5 to 2.5. So, your dosage of air and training agent should be such that it gives you much higher, you know at least this recommended air content when it is exposed to extreme freeze-throw condition, mild condition as defined by the code, as defined by the code. So, mild moderate and extreme situation as defined by the code, as defined by the code. So, this is the air and air content. So, far therefore, we have determined the water content. Air content does not have direct implications at the moment, but water content has got direct implication at the moment in order to calculate out the other, calculate out the other component or other component in the mix, proportion of other component in the mix, proportion of other component in the mix. So, having determined the water content, the next step would be to determine the water to cement or water to cementitious material. Now, American method of course, uses 20 cylinder compressive strength rather than the cube strength, it uses 20 cylinder compressive strength and therefore, the recommended water is given for average cylindrical compressive strength at 28 days in terms of MPA corresponding water by water to cement ratio by mass is given in terms of you know for non-air and trained concrete. So, this is given in a table. So, you can distinguish actually from the other two method. First of all, in Indian method, it is suggested you take it from experience or the durability requirement. In the British DOE method, strength versus water cement ratio curves are given. So, you have to pick up one of the curves. Here, the recommended water cement ratio is given in terms of a table. So, from the table, you pick up for air and trained concrete and non-air and trained concrete. So, depending upon the strength, in fact, here is only a part of the table. The complete table will have more data. So, cylinder strength is average cylinder strength is given. This is actually average strength average strength average 20 day cylinder compressive strength average which is something similar to our target mean strength except for the fact that it is actually cylinder strength. It is actually cylinder strength. And perhaps we have not discussed this so far, but when we discuss about strength or factors affecting strength of concrete, we will be seeing that the specimen shape especially in terms of L by D ratio. Has got an effect on the strength. So, cylinder strength cylinder strength, this is about 0.8 times f cube strength f cu. So, f cu, if I call it cylinder strength is equals to 0.8 f cu. In other words, the cube strength is higher than the cylinder strength. So, when you are using this, let us say like in India, where we generally use cubes. There if it is an M 25 grade of concrete, then cylinder strength will be 25 multiplied by 0.8 which will be actually 20. Or if it is you know if it is 25 here correspondingly 25 divided by 0.8 will be 331.25 or whatever it is. So, somewhere 25 will corresponds to M 30 grade of concrete, you know close to that. So, this is this while adapting the adaptation you know the for adapting this in Indian scenario, Indian condition you have to convert them to or convert cube strength to the cylinder strength. So, correspondingly you can choose the water cement ratio given there, water cement ratio given there for non-air and trained concrete and for air and trained concrete. Largest way of course, in India we do not use air and trained concrete except for Himalayan region, where air and trained men become mass because there is a problem of freestyle action. In you know freestyle deterioration due to freestyle action is possible in the Himalayan core region otherwise generally non-air and trained concrete is what we should be using. So, here the water cement ratio is straight forward obtained from the table, we obtain it from the table straight forward you obtain from the table water cement ratio is obtained from the table. But what is average strength? You see when we are talking of IS method, we talked of target mean strength FM which was FCK that is your grade strength characteristic grade strength plus 1.65 sigma, we are always talking about 28 day strength only and age is not varying. So, we were talking of target mean strength. Now, here the average strength represent something similar, average strength something represent something similar. So, these are essentially the average strength and corresponding water cement ratio you can determine. Now, how do you determine this average strength? Well, this is slightly different than the other code. First of all, it says that from 30 consecutive results you can determine the standard deviations right from 30 consecutive results you can determine the standard deviation. And if it is not available then you take the average strength FCR as Fc plus Fc plus 6.9 Fc plus 6.9 when the cylinder strength, grade cylinder strength is characteristic cylinder strength is 20 point less than 20 point 7. If it is more than 20 point 7 and less than 34 point 5 then you add 8 point 3. And if it is greater than 34 point 5 then you add this is wrong this is not you add 1 point 1 this is given as 1 point 1 Fc plus 10 point 5. So, the value is different this is not correct value is different I think we have the formulas separately. So, this is not sorry Fc plus 10 point 9 not 1 point 1 Fc plus 10 point 9. So, anyway this is Fc greater than Fc greater than 34 point 5 you have you have the average strength more than 6 point you know more than added by some number. So, basically it specifies basically specifies what should be the what should be the strength what should be the strength depending upon what should be the strength depending upon what is the cylinder strength right. So, average strength if you do not know the standard deviation but when you know the standard deviation the average when you know the standard deviation from 30 consecutive data or you know or you know it from two sets of 15 consecutive data. So, that you can find it out as under root of S 1 square plus S 2 square S can be S square can be written as S 1 square plus S 2 square right. So, S 2 15 set of data if you have available so that S is known to you. So, when you know S you find out the strength as maximum of the two given below that means this either of this or this. So, when nothing is known you find out from the table when nothing is known you find out from the table when it is known then you find out from this two formulae's equation whichever is greater maximum maximum of the two given below that is this this is your cylinder strength plus 1.34 standard deviation and or this plus 2.233 S minus 3.5 actually minimum acceptable strength minimum acceptable strength is F c dash minus 3.5. So, minimum plus 2.33 F c dash average strength. So, average strength is minimum strength plus 2.33 S that is you know it is again from that is normal distribution curve. So, 2.33 S to cover specific percentile. So, as a case we had 1.65 to cover 95 percentile right. That means, only 5 percent would be 5 percent would be showing strength less than this. Here this value is somewhat different because it is not 5 percent and this minimum strength is treated to be this. So, minimum strength plus 2.33 S should be the average strength this is again with certain confidence limit. So, whichever gives you higher based on this whichever gives you higher you choose the one whichever gives you higher. So, that you choose or you choose from the table that was that is given simply in terms of F c dash plus some value. So, that is how you choose your average strength and then go to the table and find out the then go to the table and find out the water cement ratio. So, you have found out the water cement ratio. So, we can find out the water cement ratio and we have also found out the water content. So, for this you know it is all again I repeat it is for the cylinder strength. So, average cylinder strength is known and therefore, correspondingly I found out the water cement ratio and when I found out the water cement ratio also the water content I should be able to find out the cement content. So, cement content I should be find out. But before that just to mention that S can also be obtained from two data sets having 15 data each as S 1 square plus S 2 square is equals to S square. So, that is how it can be found out right that is how we can find out. So, the next would be calculate cement content from the water content and water cement ratio required for durability or strength while durability again controls water cement ratio is controlled. You have a maximum limit of water cement ratio. You have a maximum limit of water cement ratio. So, therefore, durability is again controlled, durability controls the water cement ratio. So, you have maximum water cement ratio and from the strength consideration you have found out the water cement ratio. So, whichever is lower you choose that water cement ratio and based on that you find out the cement content because you know W by C you know W you can find out C C can be C can be obtained C can be obtained. So, you see this has got some sort of similarity up to this stage with the methods that we have looked into earlier as well. There is DOE method also does the same thing first finds out the strength water cement ratio from strength and water content from workability MSA and this whether it is a crust or natural aggregate from that kind of other words shape of the aggregate. So, you find out the water content and once water cementation water content is known C can be obtained. Now, here it differs here ACI method differs as we can see it differs ACI method would differ from earlier methods DOE methods used wet density concept. While IS method used while IS method we use total volume some total of volume must be equals to 1 meter cube. So, conservation of volume principle wet density is also similar but here what is done is you find out the dry eroded density of the aggregate dry eroded density of the aggregate that means, what you do you have you pack the aggregates coarse aggregate in 3 layers aggregates in 3 layers and find out because volume of this is known how much is the mass this volume we can find out first by feeling in its water volume of the container then put the aggregate then put the aggregate and find out how much is the mass of the aggregate. So, if you know this mass then this will be dry eroded density density dry eroded density. So, you know the dry eroded density dry eroded density and dry eroded density right cry eroded density of this is known that is mass in unit volume is known unit volume is known and if I know the volume occupied by the aggregates volume occupied by the aggregates right in the overall volume then this if I multiply by this dry eroded density that will give me the amount of coarse aggregate present in the amount of coarse aggregate present in the overall concrete system. So, estimate the coarse aggregate content for maximum size of aggregate and fineness modulus of sand from the table. This the coarse aggregate content in volume of the required aggregate content or proportion of the quart aggregate content fractions that we can find out we will just find it out just now right from the next table we look into the table. But before that I just make you know I would like you to recollect when we discussed about aggregate remember we talked about fineness modulus the fineness modulus is average it is average sieve size in some form that is what we have seen. So, fineness modulus defines the fineness of the sand fineness of the sand right if you can recollect fineness of the sand is defined by fineness modulus. So, in the next table we will come back to this one again if required fineness if you see volume of coarse aggregate per unit volume of concrete on dry eroded basis is given as by this. So, you have as your maximum size of aggregate increases here we have taken also for 50 37.5 and 50 and there large numbers are all available. This is the fineness modulus of the aggregate the increasing along this direction and this is my MSA increasing. So, total aggregate content increases in other words your sand content to decrease as I have more sizes as the MSA increases totally aggregate content increases because sand content to reduce they are sand content to reduce because it will have a better packing. So, sand content to reduce and this is related to the fineness modulus of the sand right fineness model of the sand as the fineness modulus increases the problem proportion of the sand again would reduce because this is something to do with the overall grading or overall packing of the system right overall packing of the system overall packing of the system all right. So, overall packing of the system because higher the fineness modulus it means you go to coarser you go to the coarser size overall size will be coarser which means you have got a better grading of the sand itself better grading of the sand itself send themselves pack better and they have different sizes more larger sizes also available in them. So, they occupy more volume the pack better and therefore you know the I mean the the pack they do pack back the overall packing is better. So, sand volume reduces along or aggregate coarser aggregate volume reduces as I go along this direction in fact, sand volume increases volume overall proportion of the sand actually overall proportion of the sand increases overall proportion of the sand or sand volume increases because coarser aggregate proportion is reducing because sand itself has got a better packing and more the larger sizes are also there. So, it fits into overall grading better the space here would be filled in by less sand. So, that is why you find that fineness modulus with higher the fineness modulus of sand if this is decreasing and as we increase the MSA this volume aggregate volume increases. So, the proportion of the aggregate volume is given by this one this particular table. So, supposing you find out that this is 0.64 and you know the di-rode at dry rod at density dry rod at density of the coarser aggregate multiplied by this to get the mass of the coarser aggregate that is present it means that in your total aggregate 64 percent 64 percent will be the aggregate volume aggregate volume 64 would be the aggregate volume and rest of the volume would be volume of the coarser aggregate will be this much rest of the volume would be the paste and the motor all together. So, 64 percent would be occupying volume would be occupied by the or 65 percent by the mass would be occupied by so, dry rod at density gives you the mass per unit volume volume and only 64 percent of that would be occupying the total space in concrete rest all will be fill in. So, in 1 meter cube you know dry rod at density gives you how much solid aggregate would have gone. If you multiplied by if you multiplied by this fraction that much will be the aggregate content in the coarser aggregate content in the coarser aggregate content in the concrete. So, obtained coarser aggregate content from dry rod at density and above information that percentage that you have got and then determine the fine aggregate content by subtracting the sum of the volumes of coarser aggregate cement water and near content from the unit volume of concrete. So, then again use a conservation of volume concept and you can determine the total determine the fine aggregate content and thus how you have got the proportion. So, you have got the proportion. So, you can look into now example similar example as we have done earlier while Indian M25 not M25 will not be the correct statement I will say 25 is a cylinder strength. So, this is not 25 25 MPA cylinder strength. Sevent of course, we are using OPC for the simple case of an example. If it is M25 this would have been 20 MPA cylinder strength, 20 MPA cylinder strength, but we are not using that in fact, ours is higher strength. So, 25 MPA cylinder strength, corresponding concrete strength would be you know cube strength would be 25 divided by 0.8 would make it 30 31 point right 25 31. So, 25 31 point 25. So, somewhere around M30 grade of concrete if the cylinder strength is 25 MPA. So, something close to or 30 MPA concrete that is what you look at and moderate exposure water cement ratio etcetera etcetera. Now, if we are adopting in Indian situation you can take this water cement ratio permissible by Indian code only and fineness modulus of the sand is taken as 2.40 which is required in this case and specific gravity of fine aggregates is 2.7. Slampe is same what we are taking is 80 mm same as before. Non air and drain concrete we are using because again we are only looking at the Indian scenario and we have chosen 20 mm MSA rounded aggregate as we have done before right die-rooted bulk density of course, aggregate is 1600 kg per meter cube. So, this is to be measured in 3 layers you you actually measure this in 3 layers, pack them in 3 layers and in a standard manner and measure the container volume by water displacement method then measure the mass of the aggregate that has gone in into the container. Since you know the volume and the mass therefore, you can find out that dry rounded bulk density of the course aggregate which is 1600 kg per meter cube which is there says an example is 1600 kg per meter cube specific gravity of the course aggregate is also taken as 2.7. So, first step would have been step 3 because as I said step 3 would have been step 3 in the code, but we are considering a step 1. So, this is step 3 or step 1 actually I will say step 1 from a for non air and drain concrete you have to estimate the water content and this is the table. Now, MSA my MSA is 20, my slump is 8 to 10 centimeter 80 mm therefore, my water is 200, water is 200. So, water is 200. So, this is my water content. So, water content is water content is 200 kg per meter cube. So, that is the first step. Corresponding air content of course, we know for 20 mm MSA ok just let us see then let us see for 25 before that. So, air content would be air content for 20 mm MSA if you recollect was 2 percent, 1 percent for 40 mm aggregate and 2 percent for this. So, this is the other information that we have obtained and then next step is 8.3 because you see supposing I do not have standard deviation known. So, we said average strength, average strength if not no standard deviation is known average strength when S is known for S unknown for for FC dash less than 34.5 greater than 20.7 is equals to FC average strength FC R dash. So, FC R dash is equals to FC plus 8.3. So, this is 25, 25 plus 8.3 is equals to 33.3 and if I compare this cylinder strength, this cylinder strength and if we compare this, this is the cylinder strength average cylinder strength divided by 0.8 and I will get 4 and maybe 4.2 approximately 4.4 43, 42 roughly about 42 point or 43 roughly about 43 MPA that will be a Q strength. Now, my concrete was 31.31.25 some grade plus 1.65 into the standard deviation of about 4 or 5 if I take it I think 5 by our code. So, you will have 31.25 plus if I take 5 as a standard deviation. So, this will have another 8.25 or something. So, this will be around 39.5 or 40 let us say is close to 40. So, you see this is taking slightly higher if you look from Indian standpoint view. This is slightly higher this value is slightly higher this value is slightly higher however step 2 is because this is unknown. So, that is why it is taking slightly higher. But if standard deviation becomes known then this would become lower if the standard deviation becomes known this will become lower because we said that it will be FC dash plus 1.34 into S. Now, S would be smaller here let us say S is 4. So, if it is 4 then FC dash is 25 plus 1.34 into 4 and this will be equals to plus 25. So, this will be 30 plus 36 I will take it as 31 or I will take it as FC dash minus 3.5 plus 2.33 S. So, if S is 4 this value becomes 25 minus 3.5 plus 2.33 into 4 and which will give you 9.32. So, 25 plus 9.32 is minus 3.5 so, approximately it will be 31. So, this will give me 31. So, both ways I am getting actually maximum of the 2 both ways I am getting actually 31. So, it will be 31 if the standard deviation is known and if it is not known it would have come 33.3. So, average strength would be 33.3. So, one has to decide since we said that the standard deviation is not known. So, we will be designing for 39 33 33.3 and correspondingly I must find out. So, this is the thing and correspondingly I must find out the water cement ratio from the table. So, from 25 it is 0.62 for 40 it is 0.43 and in between values are also given which we have not taken right. Now, this our value is 33.3 and corresponding to this. So, this is divided by 15. So, 0.62 minus 0.43 divided by 15 divided by you know 25 plus 15. So, power mpa power mpa it would be 0.19 divided by 0.15. So, which will come out to be roughly 1.3 power mpa. So, 25 plus 33.3 or 34 let us say 34 minus because 33.3 it was which we will approximately 34 minus 25 which would mean that the 9 mpa for 9 mpa water cement ratio has to be reduced into 0.13. So, 0.13 this is 15.0.013 0.013 0.013 power mpa for 10 mpa it will be 0.13 for 9 mpa somewhat around point. So, 0.62 minus for 9 mpa it will be 0.62 minus 0.117 and this will come out to be 3 1 right and 0.5. So, it will be 0.51. So, we take it as 0.51 or 0.5 we take it as 0.51 or 0.5. So, one can interpolate if it is not available, but how our actual table gives you a number of values in between. So, we assume in our case we assume a we assume a water content let us say 0.51. So, by use of the table by interpolation we can get the water cement ratio as 0.51. Now, we can find out the cement content. The water content was 200. If I take it as 0.5 approximately to ease you know for ease of calculation this will be 400 kg. I just taken it easy and let us say my water cement ratio specified for durability is 0.5. So, I take it as 0.4400 kg, 400 kg. So, cement content is 400 kg and I have to check whether it is more than the that is required for durability which is actually more because for this consider this condition we have seen I S 456000 gives you much less of cement. So, 400 kg of cement with 200 kg of water is what we have got so far. The next step would be to estimation of course, aggregate content and this is from this particular table and we had 20 mm msa sorry maximum size of aggregate is yeah 20 mm and finance modulus is 240. So, therefore 0.66 is a coarse aggregate content. So, 0.66 is the coarse aggregate content and with this now I can find out the volume of you know the volume fraction. So, dry dotted 66 percent multiplied by so this is the quantity of coarse aggregate that should be there you know in 1 meter cube actually 600 kg of coarse aggregate goes. But the volume that would be occupied by the coarse aggregate in bulk is a 66 percent of the total concrete that is what it is saying 66 percent of the total concrete volume aggregate total concrete volume will be occupied by the coarse aggregate. So, rest of the 0.44 percent would be occupied by of course, the other materials which will contain also some amount of air. So, coarse aggregate content straight away you get it you get it you know coarse aggregate content in 1 meter cube 66 percent of the meter cube is actually occupied by coarse aggregate in bulk in bulk in bulk all right. So, in bulk and therefore, I multiplied by bulk density which means that there are coarse inside and rest of the material will be other material. Fine aggregate content now I can determine by subtracting by the volume of coarse aggregate cement water and of course, the air volume also from the total volume. So, I will total volume 1 meter cube minus actually 2 percent I should subtract. So, actually I should have an equation 1 minus and volume of cement also 2 percent air volume air air volume is 0.02. So, this has to be subtracted now volume of coarse aggregate volume of water. So, volume of coarse aggregate is given as 1056 divided by 2.7, 2,700 volume of water will be 200 divided by 1000 and volume of cement will be 400 divided by 3,150. So, therefore, volume of fine aggregate you can find out volume of fine aggregate you can find out right volume of fine aggregate you can find out and this will come out to be point this minus 0.02 also should be there because of the air content air content air content and this will be 0.2 say 4. So, 2 4 is the volume. So, 0.24 multiplied by 2,700 will give you the fine aggregate content. So, this is 2,700 will give you fine aggregate content and this we have found out comes out to be this is fine aggregate it is 2 points 2 this 2 2.24 because 2 percent air content has to be subtracted. So, this value will come out to be 27 into 24 and 108. So, 6 4 this is how much 27 into 24 is 648. So, I get fine aggregate content will be 648. Fine aggregate content will be 648 not 700, but it will be 648 kg per meter cube. So, if I put it together if I put it together from ACI method I will get water 200 kg, cement 400 kg this is this is incorrect this will be 648 kg per meter cube and I will have coarse aggregate 1056 kg. So, total sum of course, there will be some change in this there will be less 2 percent because there is some one top about 60 kg. So, this will be around 2305 kg per meter cube. So, this is how we obtain the we can obtain the obtain the proportion through ACI method. So, if you now compare this 2 different methods are 3 different methods step 1 I mean you can generalize one thing you can generalize all methods all methods estimates water to cement ratio from strength that we said in the first day water content is determined from workability aggregate workability workability all determined from workability this determined from workability and MSA and shape of aggregate. So, W you determine from MSA slump and shape water cement ratio from strength strength then cement content calculated only the next thing is to determine the coarse aggregate to fine aggregate ratio that is determined differently by different methods. So, you know most of the methods determines water cement ratio from strength water content from MSA slump shape of the aggregate cement content then you can calculate out and coarse to fine ratio is calculated differently by different method. So, the diagram that we show in the very first class related to them general mix design procedure that that is how it is you know that is how where it follows actually strength is a function of water cement ratio. So, durability requirement you know based on the exposure chemical exposure durability requirement determines the water cement ratio and strength also governs the water cement ratio. So, whichever is lower you choose that water cement ratio while workability is governed by workability is governed by the paste content and which also depends upon the packing characteristics of the coarse aggregate and fine aggregate system. So, it will depend upon the maximum size of aggregate shape of the aggregate and water content therefore, is determined based on the slump based on slump and maximum size nominal size of aggregate and shape of the aggregate etcetera etcetera. So, once these two are known cement content is calculated and up to this all the three methods we discussed all by and large same in some form or other. Now, once you know the water content and cement content you can water content and water cement ratio you can calculate out cement content. Now, three methods differed in Indian code you have got the proportions of fine aggregates are also specified in the total aggregate proportions of the fine aggregates are specified specified in DOE method proportions of total first you find out the total aggregate from total aggregate from wet density cards and since you know the wet density total aggregate content you can find out by subtracting the coarse aggregate, subtracting the cement and the water. In ACI method then you first find out the quantity proportion of coarse aggregate in or volume proportion of coarse aggregate in the total concrete and then multiply this by the dry rotted density that will give you the amount of aggregate in Indian method you find out from the conservation of volume equation because you know the cement content you know the water content proportion of fines are known to you from table proportion of fines in the total aggregate or proportion of coarse in the coarse aggregate in the total aggregate volume that is known to you and therefore you know that from since this is known therefore fines and coarse you can find out by setting simply two equations. So, by and large the principles of all these methods these two methods three methods are same except for the last stage of it but in all cases as we mentioned earlier it is the trial mixes it is only the first mix you can get it. The reliability of the strength water cement ratio tables as given in ACI is not not I mean reliability they are reliability in Indian scenario it may not be applicable simply for Indian scenario because as you recall strength is a function of water cement ratio when all other things remain same. Now the aggregate type the cement properties cement itself they would be differing you know from country to country. So, this is you know there will be there can be infinite possibility of strength water cement ratio relationship because from a brown slope also we have seen there are two constants and this two constants could would actually determine the actual strength water cement ratio relationship and this constant depends upon the aggregate type cement type etcetera etcetera. So, directly direct use of ACI water cement ratio relationship may not be the best thing to do. The other problem of course, associate are not problem but other care one must take is the ACI method actually uses cylinder strength. So, one has to be careful about using ACI method when adopting in Indian scenario you have to take the cube strength to in equivalent cylinder strength roughly taken as 80 percent. So, this is the other issue. So, keeping this two point together one can actually adopt any of this method in Indian scenario, but that gives you only the first trial water cement ratio is most important. Therefore, Indian code current code of 2009 10262 definitely puts the water cement ratio should be determined from experience it does not give you any kind of fixed guideline which both the other methods do. So, when adopting either DOE method or ACI method one must choose the water cement ratio perhaps with your experience you know rather than rather than trying to choose it from table as such but in any case they can they all servers are starting point. You have to do trial mix and find out the strength, flam or specified properties from the mix that you have obtained and then do the modification and then of course, site modification towards moisture content etcetera definitely require. Lastly, you have to actually do trial and monitor the strength also trial to start with and once you have started casting you have to monitor the strength also and modify the mix. So, mixed proportion is not a static thing it is actually a dynamic thing and continuously must be more you know monitored and the mixed proportions will have to be modified. So, it is to be understood that once you have got the mixed design done right in the beginning that is not the end of it and it cannot be used again and again without modifying and monitoring the same. So, for modifying you have to monitor the practice of having a specified mixed proportion and use it forever is not correct. So, one has to monitor it and modify it continuously anyway. So, with this note of summarizing this three method we would like to conclude our discussion that we have seen that these are the four proportions we have already seen and we can we can summarize that today we have discussed the ACI method. Earlier we have discussed D o E and Indian method and we have also discussed somewhat about the comparison of these three methods and where you know which where I mean how can we adopt them in Indian scenario. I think with this we will conclude thank you very much. === Lecture 16 Transcript === on mixed design of concrete, we generally talked about the principles of mixed design, then we looked into several simplified method. In the last lecture of this module, we shall be talking about some recent concepts, such as packing density, rheology and applying them to mixed design principles. So general outline of our discussion should be packing density, then rheology followed by the proportioning involving them. Now you know, you remember that we discussed earlier also concrete is a particulate system. We bonded together with particles bonded together and in fresh state wet paste and aggregate systems from the concrete, that is in the fresh state. Largest coarse aggregate particles are packed together with interstitial voids and this instead interstitial voids are actually filled with smaller coarse aggregate. And the remaining interstitial voids now between the larger size particles of coarse aggregates are filled with fine aggregate, quite often they could be natural sand or cross stone etcetera as we have discussed earlier. Now that is further voids which are there within the sand, then is filled by cement or cementitious paste or powder and water paste. So that is what the concrete is and if we look at it for example, the same. So this is your aggregate system, a few of them let us say and let us just arrange them in a slightly different manner. Arrange them in a slightly different manner, we get it this is the coarse aggregate they get arranged in this manner. Then the black ones as you can see they are the finer aggregate right and now the interstitial voids are filled with you know. So this is the finer of the aggregate system black ones and now still gap within will be filled in with some sort of fine aggregate which in this particular case is sand and all this put together makes the concrete at the hardened state which will look like this which will look like this. So you see in this one you can see larger size coarse aggregate and the finer relatively finer, relatively less coarse smaller coarse aggregates they go into the interstitial and rest all is filled with model system. So you see the packing of the particle it is system that is very very important because if the packing is good you require less paste and we talked about this earlier also and we talked about the concepts of packing density if you recollect from module earlier one the earlier modules and we talked about binary mixtures and we said that if we have two aggregates a and b we mix in some volume you know some proportions of their volume say a is 1 to 0 and correspondingly b varies from 0 to 1 you remember the void ratios we said that e a is a void ratio of a and e b is the void ratio of the b and when you mix them together theoretically speaking the void ratios would reduce down as the proportion of volume fraction changes and there is a minimum point and real situation the void ratio varies in this manner and but minimum is more or less same corresponding to the straight lines that has been shown and this is what we have discussed earlier also. Correspondingly packing density we define as the volume of the solid alone divided by the overall volume this would increase you know correspondingly depending upon the fractions of a particular aggregate from pure a to b as we vary pure a to pure b. So, first you have pure a and the left hand side then you add some amount of b so therefore, combination of a and b volume fraction would change when a is 100 percent b is 0 and when b is 100 percent a is 0 and this is we have discussed this we have discussed earlier and packing density becomes maximum somewhere in between void ratio is minimum the theoretical curve is shown in blue the real one will be you know with the one shown by black and this is because of what is called particle interference loosening effect and wall effect etcetera etcetera we discussed. So, this is the situation of binary mixtures and this can be extended to multinary mixtures and the volume fraction at which the packing density is maximum or the void is void ratio is minimum one can determine from this kind of consideration and some theoretical models are actually available and this models of course you know is not be very easy to use because the material properties or aggregate properties that has to be all available for example, F d luru F d larrard who has actually postulated a number of such models empirical equations, but a simpler procedure we can actually follow in normal course you know in course of mixed proportioning of normal mixtures. So, let us see what are those simpler experimental procedure thing is that you pack the aggregate mixture with each aggregate in definite proportions you can use mass proportions here because it is very difficult to control the volume. So, use different proportions mass proportions and then pack them in a container whose volume is known. Now, this container volume may be V and you one would have to measure this by water replacement method that means you fill in this one with water find out the mass of the water by two difference of two weights empty container empty empty container and the container full with water and this volume is V you know difference of them will give the mass of water and from which you can really find out the volume B. Now, then you pack the aggregates in right kind of proportions that you have decided to put in together and if the total mass is w or for a given mass it is w g is the specific gravity and if it is both force aggregate their specific gravity should be known same which could be same. So, the packing density will be simply given by w by g which gives the volume of the solid w is the mass of the solid g is the specific gravity. So, w by g is the volume of the solid divided by V which is the volume of the container it will give you the packing density when you have mixing two of them together volume of each individual one you can find out some total of each individual component divided by the overall volume B will give you you know. So, it can be written as simply it can be written as you know w 1 by g 1 plus w 2 divided by g 2 w 2 divided by g 2 1 by V. So, that will be your d P. So, this is how you can find out it would be you know w 1 by for example, I can I just rub this off and tell you this should be actually g this should be g 2 and 1 by v that will give you the packing density when you are mixing them up in some definite mass proportions. So, in this manner actually you can find out actually you can find out packing density corresponding to any proportion repeat this procedure for different fractions and plot and such a plot would look like this you know such a plot would typically look like this for example, here we have got weight fraction S 1 of S 1 a particular let us say fine aggregate sand it was and S 2 is the other one. So, as the weight fraction of the S 1 increases the packing density we measured and calculated as I just mentioned and you find it is maximum at some point maximum at this point it is maximum at this point. 60 percent of S 1 and 40 percent of S 2 may gives you the highest packing density. So, it is a simple experiment and you can do this experiment with your do this you can do this experiment with your aggregates and you know determine the packing density of any two aggregates assuming that they belong to a small range of size. So, that is how it is. So, this was the case of example of packing density measurement or measure packing density. So, what you do is since you have found out 60 and 40 is the best combination you can choose 60 and 40 and make this you know as your fine aggregate and the in the case of the fine aggregate example which I talked about. But typically what you will have you will normally you will have say you are dealing with 20 mm down coarse aggregate. So, you will have 20 mm down up to 4.75 and then will be another set of aggregate 10 mm down up to 4.75 this is the two coarse aggregates. Now, find out the best proportions for the maximum packing density of these two coarse aggregates and let this mixture be M 1 2 for two coarse aggregate 1 is M S a 20 another is M M say 10 mm. Now, these proportions then you mix them up in this two proportions that is whatever proportion you find out is the best which gives you the best packing density and then use this mixture right as one of the aggregate and fine aggregate as another or if you have more than two fine aggregates mix them up find out the best proportion for the highest packing or maximum packing density choose that proportion of the fine aggregate choose that fine aggregate and similarly choose the best coarse aggregate normally fine aggregate will be only one coarse aggregate there may be two I am talking of normal strength concrete high strength concrete or other kind of you know advanced concrete might have somewhat different sort of thing. So, in normal strength concrete 20 mm and 10 mm you will have two different generally typically in Indian scenario you will have 20 mm and 10 mm 2 aggregates you mix them up find out the proportions of 20 mm and 10 mm for best packing density and then now this use this mixture together with fine aggregate and find out the maximum packing density that will be the proportions of 20 mm down 10 mm down and the fine aggregate which gives you the maximum packing density you know if there are more aggregates you can repeat this procedure for each two. So, consider them binary each two and two of them then another two of them and combine them together if there are more of them you can actually go on repeating this procedure, but it would become generally cumbersome if there are too many of them typically you will have two coarse aggregates one fine aggregate and in the using this process you can actually find out what is the best combination of the coarse aggregate both the fractions mix together and the fine aggregate both the fractions mix together. So, once you have found out now we can look into the paste content. So, let us say dp max is the highest maximum packing density. So, 1 minus dp max is appropriate you know is approximate void content in the mix if I mix them well actually void content will be higher because you know that is because of wall effect and loosening effect and all that as we said when the paste goes inside it will push the coarse aggregate apart it will it will cause some sort of interference in the packing of the coarse aggregate and therefore, it will cause loosening besides that the paste particles of paste that is cement etcetera will not pack very well goes to the close to the boundary of the coarse aggregate. So, you have wall effect and loosening effect this actually pushes out which you have discussed earlier. Now, such effect would cause actually you know dispersion of the coarse aggregate more 3 to 10 percent and this also I have mentioned earlier in one of our undial lectures. So, it means that minimum paste content must account for the above void content that is 1 minus dp max and more to account for wall effect and loosening effect. So, 3 to 10 percent more that is dispersion is 3 to 10 percent. So, what you can do is you can actually you know you can take about 10 percent more what you can take about 10 percent more paste. So, let us go back to the slide again and so 1 minus 1 minus dp max into 1.1 that should be your minimum paste content in the system because 10 percent it will have it will cause dispersion of the coarse aggregate. So, 1 minus dp max into 1.1 10 percent more that will be the minimum paste content. I mean it could be somewhat less but conservative way you can start with 1 minus dp max into 1.1 and that is the minimum paste content. So, this is one issue of how much paste you need for to have properly compacted concrete. But the other issue related to this the consistency of the paste itself to look at that we should look at what is a spectre of the fresh concrete. What we expect of the fresh concrete normally I am talking about again normal concrete it will contain around 30 percent void and it does not confirm to the shape of the mold. So, therefore, we compacted it by vibration and when you are compacting it is vibration it stands on a hip. So, it must actually yield easily and move and deform under shear and shell also flow easily to attain the desired shape. But at the same time it must maintain its uniformity and cohesiveness particle if relative distance between you know it must remain uniform that means larger size particle particle should not go at one side or paste should not you know move away to another side. So, there should maintain their uniform mixture and cohesiveness it should look similar coming from the same source. So, that is what should happen this is what is expected from the fresh concrete. So, we must look into therefore, shear stress chain behavior of fresh concrete because we said that while compacting we apply some kind of vibration and under the vibration it is actually subjected to a kind of shear stress and a given particular shear stress it will start moving and then it will start in fact you know the mobility the flowing would start right. So, you can look into this behavior of fresh concrete. Now, if you look at it is has to have flow flow fluid takes place again frictional resistance offered by immediate next layer if flow is occurring one layer you see if you can consider pipe flowing full and the boundary velocity is 0, but at the center it is maximum. So, if I consider a small layer in between the layer closer to the boundary of the pipe will actually exert a kind of frictional resistance to that layer which is closer towards the center. So, in case of liquid flow this is what happens frictional resistance is offered by one layer to the next layer immediately next layer which is in contact with the moving layer and there is a velocity gradient normal would be existing and you know in case of a laminar flow in the transverse direction in case of a laminar flow. Now, what is the relevant property it is viscosity. So, actually shear stress is proportional to velocity gradient and the constant of proportional will do is the viscosity. So, that is in case of liquid now we are talking of concrete or similar sort of thing which is actually in plastic state and if we recall we have also talked about that you know concrete is in plastic state. Now, a solid has got a definite shape and volume liquid does not have a shape although it has got a volume the gas of course, does not have even a definite volume. So, we will confine ourselves to liquid and solid the plastic is something in between. So, plastic it does not have you know it may have a definite shape but under stress it would lose that shape and it will take this you know it will it shape will go on changing. So, therefore, concrete is actually in plastic state it is not in liquid state because it is not flowing on its own not solid I am talking of fresh concrete not solid in the fresh state because it does not have a definite shape once it is hardened it becomes solidified you know I mean solid solid once it sets it becomes complete solid hardening of course, it related to strength. So, it becomes solid so, before it becomes solid is in plastic state. So, you got to apply some stress and when it starts actually deforming. So, that property is important and this you know subject through which you study this flow behavior of plastic material we call it rheology. Now, cohesiveness of concrete must be maintained and it should not segregate and this property is governed by tensile strength of fresh concrete you know if the tensile strength is low particle will separate out. So, tensile strength is important and it will be governed by tensile strength of fresh concrete. So, we are looking at rheology that subject which deals with flow properties and shear stress for solid you know we are just distinguishing the solid for solid shear stress is proportional to shear strain and constant of proportionality is the rigidity modulus liquid deforms continuously under shear stress no matter how small the stress is even without the stress actually it will deform and shear stress is proportional to viscosity multiplied by shear strain grade you know because I said velocity gradient velocity gradient you can actually express in terms of shear strain grade and that is Newton law for viscous fluid. So, essentially you know tau is proportional to viscosity into dV dy and dV dy can be written as d x you know d x by dy and d x by d x by dy you know this can be written as d x dy dt and this is nothing but shear strain. So, d gamma dt this can be written as so strain rate. So, it will be actually strain rate so it is same as you know so mu viscosity is the property, but then in case of plastics or all this will happen in case of plastic all this will happen you know in case of plastic all this will happen after certain point of load application in other words after certain stress has been applied. So, it flows when shear stress is applied so the up to shear certain shear stress it does not actually move, but beyond that it starts moving. So, if I look at this therefore, if I look at this particular situation this is for solid this for solid you know up to this level up to which actually it will not you know it will not move it does not move actually up to certain points it does not move and beyond this point beyond this point beyond this point up to this point it does not move and beyond this point one up to one it is actually behaving like a solid it is behaving like a solid it is behaving like a solid up to this point it behaves like a solid this is behaving like a solid one to two it started some sort of flowing and 3 to 4 I mean that is a typical Bingham fluid not necessarily concrete. So, 3 to 4 it behaves like a liquid and your velocity profile is like this. So, in a solid there is no velocity profile velocity is constant here along this direction velocity here and velocity here everywhere is same here the velocity increases, but then there is here again it is constant and 3 to 4 pure liquid velocity profile is parabolec. So, this is Newtonian liquid for which you know 3 to 4 behavior is right from the beginning this is mu mu rate of strain shear deformation and shear stress and Bingham fluid is 1 up to certain stress it does not show up any movement no mobility 1 to 2 it shows this kind of mobility 2 to 3 it is like this and 3 to 4 again it behaves like liquid. So, shear stress versus shear strain rate of shear deformation or shear strain rate is shown and that is what it is. So, concrete in his plastic state or cement paste in a plastic state can be modeled something similar to this one. And if I extend this line this point this is called eel shear stress this is called eel shear stress this is called eel shear stress if I extend this point is called eel shear stress tau 0 tau 0. So, this is called eel shear stress tau 0 right so two properties are important tau 0 and this slope this slope is the mu So, Bingham fluid or something similar kind of concrete would show yield shear stress and then it will show some sort of plastic viscosity. So, these are biological properties of concrete, biological properties of concrete. If we continue to look at it, you know we will find that addition of water increases viscosity. So, normal concrete will be somewhere here, addition of water actually causes increase you know viscosity I mean increase in the what you call yield shear stress is here, it will lie somewhere there. As you add water more addition of water it increases the you know shear strain that actually increases. So, liquid Newtonian liquid is somewhere here, addition of super plasticizer or something you know or some grain stabilizer or grain they were somewhere here. So, concrete would be somewhere something like this, this is your Newtonian liquid is somewhere there. So, this is what it is and if we look further on to this one for concrete. If you add GGBFS or dispersing and mixture viscosity increases you know in this manner viscosity cement dispersing and mixtures. So, if I add admixtures plastic viscosity can increase or decrease but yield shear stress definitely decreases. So, if I add plasticizer or the water reducing agent, if I add water reducing agent the some of them will increase the plastic viscosity, some of them will reduce the viscosity but definitely reduce down the yield stress. This is the plastic you know viscosity. So, if I plot plastic viscosity versus yield shear stress fine particles like you know if you add water they go in long this direction more paste it will also move along this direction. You know some case of more water more paste less water it actually increases the viscosity but increases the. So, less water less reduce water lower viscosity lower yield lower viscosity sorry reduce water less water increases the viscosity increase as well as increases the tau 0 increase tau 0. So, lower the water yield shear stress increases viscosity also increases and more water you have lower yield stress more water goes like this lower yield stress and lower pressure less paste it actually plus viscosity reduces but the yield shear stress increases. So, what we see is see more paste of course, it causes plastic viscosity to increase and also reduction in the you know it is along this direction more paste results in this direction. So, you can see actually if we pulverized fuel ash it actually reduces your yield shear stress stress like you know reduces the viscosity also like fly ash or GGBFS you know. So, what we see if I add more water less water if I reduce the water if I reduce the water actually my plastic viscosity will increase yield shear stress will increase. Lower paste viscosity will decrease but yield shear stress will increase more water viscosity decreases yield shear stress decreases more paste more paste if I put in yield shear stress decreases but viscosity increases. So, you see I can actually manipulate because I need least yield stress least pressure I should be applying before it starts moving and it must not have too much of friction. So, mu should be as low as possible mu should be as low as possible not too much of a friction. So, therefore, you can look into this rheological properties and therefore, roll of paste becomes very important paste and water because GGBFS, PFA etc they also go into paste. Admixture of course, has the biggest role in all these issues. So, roll of paste we can quickly look into water makes the cement plate plastic by progressive addition of water air filled water is occupied by water and if you recall I talked about basic water content sometime which is achieved when all open air voids are isolated by water. So, all air bubbles gets actually isolated and that corresponds to you know air bubbles becomes isolated within the interstitial space of cement system water coats all the cement. So, all open air voids are isolated by water to air bubbles and this corresponding consistency we call it normal consistency. So, therefore, water in the paste is very very important I must have sufficient water above normal consistency and if I add higher water it makes the paste softer with greater dispersion of cement particles. I should have sufficient paste to fill in the voids and we have seen that more the paste actually they of course, has some effect on the viscosity but they reduce down the in shear stress also. So, I must have sufficient paste in order to disperse the aggregate that is first thing and the paste itself should have sufficient water content so that you know it is it is easy to it has you know ease of flowing. Now, viscosity can be related to dispersion distance between particle and also they can be related to water cement ratio let us see how they are related viscosity of cement paste. New zero is viscosity of water delta is a parameter representing distance between particle in micron 5 micron for water cement ratio of 1.5 and that corresponds to minimum nu. So, you see nu viscosity can be related to water cement ratio and also to also to some experimental factor B and you know water to cement ratio and N represents for normal consistency S is blanched fineness. So, this S is blanched fineness this is water cement ratio for normal consistency if you add more water than this that is the difference you know if you add more water than this. So, this term would actually you know more water this term will reduce above normal consistency this term will reduce and if this reduces viscosity will actually you know first of all blanched fineness finer viscosity will increase this term is reduced viscosity will increase minus 1 of course, is very much there outside the bracket and if this is actually according to this formula if this is you know is very large lot of water this term will tend to zero and viscosity will be nearly 1 which is near to the water. So, whatever it is this viscosity can be related by through this kind of empirical formula. So, what we understand is it is related to the type of cement of course, but it is also related to water to cement, but we are talking of the cement paste only water to cement how much is the water in the cement issues cement water or powder system that is what governs the viscosity of the paste itself. In case of in case of concrete will be a water content we say be the total mass or volume of the aggregate and concrete system. So, water content is what would govern this viscosity. So, in concrete paste forms a matrix where aggregates are disperse the matrix separates the aggregate and also holds them together and act as a lubricating material, anabolic plastic deformation the degree of dispersion is 3 to 10 percent that is what we say. So, therefore, decreasing the volume of matrix reduces dispersion and increases particle interference and stiffens the concrete. So, roll of paste is very important just is by the way normal concrete the paste content would be around 30, 32, 33 percent. If you look at more flowing concrete it might go to somewhere on 37, 38 percent like self compacting concrete you have much higher paste, but the paste itself should be flowing this very important. So, below a level loading volume of matrix would result in harsh and segregating concrete because aggregate will not be held together they will move away and increasing the matrix volume improves the concrete consistency the matrix itself must be of adequate consistency. So, it increases the consistency low water cement ratio matrix I am talking only of the paste. So, therefore, that is why the water cement ratio comes in low water cement ratio matrix may cause dispersion, but cannot hold the aggregate together. So, stiffens to high water cement ratio matrix is thin so water moves out. So, segregation of water actually bleeding would occur low dispersion or low holding capacity. So, the proportion of you know water in the matrix that is in the paste and powder you know put together all kind of cement and other powder put together. That is very very important because if it is too high it might thin and water might run away. If it is too less then it cannot be able to hold the aggregate system. So, the water is the most important aspect. Normal concrete of course, have water cement ratio more than 0.26 to 0.33 which is actually normal consistency. Thus you will have adequate paste will have adequate consistency. It is in high strength concrete you know you have to look into this. Paste content shall be adequate not only to fill the water in the aggregate system, but also more than that required for proper dispersion. For reason of economy and other factors the paste content is in normal concrete ranges from 28 to 30 percent. All the higher paste content improves the waterability because paste content cement and thus the costless material. So, that is why people who have tendency to keep the paste content to its minimum. And mixed proportioning will be done accordingly. So, minimum water content of paste is that is basic water content we talked about more water mix and water reducing agent makes flowing paste, makes should have sufficient paste, makes should have sufficient place. This shows a paste flowing paste you know just flowing paste. So, that is what it is. So, water and sufficient paste. Now, paste content water content and super plasticizer dosage would go on the flow of properties of the mix. That is we have understood from our discussion right now. Strength and durability is governed by water to cement ratio or you know change water to cement t-shears plus some kf which we have seen earlier you know water to binder related to somewhat related to water to binder ratio. This we have seen earlier and we can write two equation based on this. How the equations are like this? First of all if I am trying to get the mixed proportion, water volume of water plus volume of the cement must be equals to 1 minus the dp max that I have determined earlier into 10 percent extra. So, the paste content must be minimum paste content you know this is a equation related to minimum paste content and that is related to packing density. The other equation of relating to water and cement is related to strength or if I do not know a relationship between strength and water cement ratio I can start with water to cement ratio required for durability. As we have done in Indian standard method practice 10262 2009. So, I can start this as W by C or W by C plus kf k you can take as 0.3 to start with and that must correspond to the durability maximum water cement ratio permeable permissible for durability or you can take from experience as well like 10262 method which you have discussed earlier. So, you have a relationship for water cement ratio from durability and strength and you have another relationship from the packing density and paste content required. So, two equations water and cement can be determined. Now, you need to determine the other proportions from packing density coarse aggregate 1 you know what is the fraction of coarse aggregate 1 in the total coarse aggregate system that was known to me F 1 from packing best packing optimal packing. Similarly, the fine aggregates or the total coarse aggregate proportion of coarse aggregate in the total aggregate system which I can call it F 2 is also known from packing density and lastly the total volume of aggregate system must be equals to the packing density itself because volume of the solids pure solids that is volume of the coarse aggregate 1 coarse aggregate 2 plus fine aggregate must be equals to the packing you know packing density because that is the volume in 1 meter cube I am talking of all these proportions in 1 meter cube like we have done earlier kg per meter cube content of aggregate system. So, I have now three more equations and I have three more unknowns W CA 1 W CA 2 and WFA fine aggregate content coarse aggregate content per meter cube of concrete and coarse aggregate 1 content of per you know per meter cube of concrete specific gravity must be the input like we have done earlier. So, you can see that I have got 5 equations and I have got 5 unknowns and they can easily be solved. You do not require a big matrix or anything to solve that you know you do not require them because W C can be solved from the previous two equations and these three equations will give you simply W CA 1 W CA 2 and W CA 3. So, I have got the mixed proportions of concrete using this constant. So, this 5 unknowns are known to me and there is a mixed proportion. This mixed proportion obtain would have least flow properties because I have taken the minimum paste content for given W by C or W by binder to increase slump at maximum possible dosage of compatible W or a determined by min slump test. So, this is the starting point this was the starting point for walkability it will give you you measure the slump and find out this is the right kind of slump you require if you need more slump well you cannot do without that paste content because otherwise you will have voids in the system. So, if you need more slump which normally you would because this will be a least slump add possible dosage of compatible water reducing agent and that should be determined from min slump test. You want to increase slump further add maximum you will get some slump you want to get more slump you add the paste content and recalculate the whole process thing. So, it follows from our earlier discussion of different mix design methods that we talked about and how do you find out the optimal dosage of the or the compatible super plasticizer or water reducing agent you do min slump test. Min slump code looks like this you can see that it is actually you can see that it is actually 38 millimeter 50 millimeter 19 millimeter and you have it looks like this is on the platform as shown and once you have filled it in lifted almost like our slump find out the slump flow. This slump flow for the given paste because water to cement ratio you have determined water content and cement you know water and the cement quantities you have determined their proportions are known. Mix your cementitious material it can be extended to all cementitious combination actually water I mean cement flyers etcetera or cement and water so make the paste as you desire for the given water to cement ratio and add different dosage of water high range water reducing agent super plasticizer hyper plasticizer whatever you call it and find out the flow. Now this flow can be actually measured so you can see in this particular example there are six such super plasticizer walls used to a particular cement system you know particular cement plus another cementitious material system and you can see the flow in centimeter goes on increasing but there is a point of you know maximum point beyond that it is not really increasing. So this is for super plasticizer 1 2 3 4 5 6 super plasticizers have been plotted here. Now the optimal dosage will be somewhere therefore this super plasticizer optimal dosage will be somewhere you know the red one it will be somewhere here for each one you can find out what is the optimal dosage. Now this optimal dose or maximum dose that you can apply because beyond this by addition of super plasticizer it does not show any further improvement in flow. So this that this dose as you have obtained from this experiment of many slum it should not exceed the limit that has been actually specified by the manufacturer because then you will have all kind of negative effect. So maximum obtained from here or the maximum dosage specified by the manufacturer whichever is lower you can put in that because higher the super plasticizer you are using without any strength loss segregation or such thing it would minimize your cement consumption and that reduces the cost and also adds to sustainability. So therefore we should like to use as much as super plasticizer or water reducing as possible to minimize our cement consumption and find out by many slum method what is the best super plasticizer the best super plasticizer most compatible will be one which gives you maximum flow with least dose. So similar kind of test one can determine and one can determine the particular super plasticizer. Then add this super plasticizer to get the slump you need if you need still higher slum then you have to increase the paste content which means that you will increase water cement and correspondingly the super plasticizer dosage also. But that strength calculate you know in order to find out whether it satisfy your first trial mix you have started from you might start from durability point or from experience as it is done in 10262 which you have discussed earlier and shown you as an example earlier also. So you actually cast trial mix with another water cement ratio. Let us say 0.05 less than the durability or you might still cast another one 0.01 less than the durability. So three water cement ratios or water cementitious ratios as you wish you might cast for your control mix of course it will be water cement ratio but if you are using flyers then you can either use the DOE method or use the Indian IS 262 10262 method whichever way you like flyers business you can add. So you can have two three water cement ratio strength determined a two three water cement ratios to identify what is the water cement ratio. So trial mix would be two three similar to IS 10262 which is quite rational and check of course the cement content for durability requirement it should not be less than the cement content specify. This W c dash K f for Pozzelina can be calculated by as DOE method earlier we have discussed or it can also be calculated from 10262 method. So you see you know so therefore complete mix proportion you can obtain complete mix proportion you can obtain from the packing density concept and also using the idea of rheology as such today till date it is difficult to model the rheology part from you know like theoretical understanding of concrete. So you can apply some idea basic ideas and obtain your mix design. Package density method has been actually proposed and but as I told you the parameters required for the aggregate systems are fairly you know complicated because the fact you have to determine all those properties of the aggregates of parameters associated to the aggregate if you want to if you want to use the formulae switch available. But for the normal strength concrete mixes so one might do it for very high strength system still one may be doing. So if you want to do it for you know normal concrete then the procedure that has been just mentioned is a good procedure. So what we have discussed so far we have discussed packing density concepts which you have earlier also discussed with reference to aggregate and we had just tried to show you an example how you can use this concept in normal mix design practices. If you are doing high strength concrete then of course or very high strength system then this has to be done in a with much more rigouricity than what has been discussed here. The properties required for each individual type of aggregate that has to be actually you know seen and understood and measured. Then we also looked into the real logic concepts namely the properties real logical properties of concrete and then we have discussed about how to do mix proportioning using this sort of concept. So this is not right now still there is not there in any code or anything of that kind or any guidelines for practice and so on. So but one can adopt this sort of practices especially if one is looking into you know systematic procedure for development of normal strength concrete as well as can be extended to the high strength concrete also. So I think with this actually we discussed our discussion on mix design finished the summary of this particular lecture is packing real logic concepts and mix design. But if you look at the whole module summary then what you have looked into first of all we looked into the basic principles of mix design. If you recall we talked about you we had a diagram and when we say the strength is a function of water cement ratio most of the mix design procedure follows that then you know workability or such thing is governed by essentially the aggregate type they are packing the shape and so on so forth they are grading which is related to the packing density and etc etc and based on the workability and the water cement ratio we get actually the water content and the cement content and absolute volume remaining constant we actually find out the total aggregate content. Find two course aggregate comes from the grading or they are packing. So this is what we discussed in the beginning followed by Indian standard method DOE method British practice and then we discussed the ACA method lastly today we actually discussed some concepts modern concepts and how they can be put into practice in case of mix design of concrete. So this completes our module module 5 and let us answer thank you very much. === Lecture 17 Transcript === So, after looking to the concrete mix proportioning in the module 4, let us look at module 5 and in this one we would be looking at the concrete process especially in the fresh state. So, first lecture on this is actually batching and mixing of concrete and we should be talking about first what is concrete production, the production process batching and then mixing in this particular lecture. We will follow it up with transporting placing of concrete and then curing as the concrete process can be described in this manner. First you have batching followed by mixing, followed by transport then place it compact it and you of course, of course, you have to cure it. That gives you the concrete. So, this is the concrete production process and in this process of course, quality control is most important you know finally, the product should be as we desire, as we would like to produce you know to our requirement. So, therefore, this is what this diagram shows the concrete construction or production process. Today of course, we will consider it ourselves to will concentrate ourself to batching and mixing. Now, what is batching? It is basically is the process of measurement of specified quantities of cement aggregate water and admixtures. Which we have decided, we have decided the proportions in the last module. We have looked into the you know from the from the requirement of the properties of performance requirement of concrete. We have tried to find out what should be the relative proportions of different ingredients in concrete namely cement cementitious system aggregate water and admixtures. Now, batching is the process by which actually we wear them, we measure them, measure the specified quantities in correct proportion. So, that is what is batching. Now, batching process can be volumetric or mass basis weight you know basis. Now, volumetric batching could have been you know, it was done earlier long long back and even one might do is you know like one volume with six volume, one volume of cement with six volume of sand one is to six mortar and that kind of thing you know. So, it is very loose actually. So, volumetric batching in case of concrete is not desired. If you if you have some container you can fill in the fill in the container with the aggregate and therefore volumetric one can measure this volume. So, it was relatively easy or less time consuming I will say to just put in some you know up to in a container for example, one cubic fit a box. So, just fill it with the aggregate and that is volumetric batching. Now, that is not desirable because controlling the total mass within a volume is very very difficult. Somebody may put in little bit more by shaking it so that it packs better. Somebody may just put it as a heap and just you know wipe off from the top or travel it from the top. So, we will have less volume of aggregate. So, therefore volume is difficult to control. So, therefore, engineered concrete is produced on mass basis and that is what your Indian standard code IS 456, 2000 also says. Because mass basis you can reproduce it. Lose volume cannot be reproduced and it is not economical. So, lose volume is not reproducible and therefore, it is not economical except for some small job you would not do it. Then control and storage of materials you must have aggregate beans for storing aggregates, silos for storing cement and cementitious material. Actually storing is very important. It should not get for example, aggregates. They should not get contaminated with dust or something of that kind. Apparently, it may look simple, but if you store it in open you can have problems of dust coming from the environment and contaminating them especially places like let us say north to st India where dust terms are quite common in summer like Rajasthan even in places like Delhi, Kanpur you have such kind of dust terms. And storing aggregates in open may be problem. Even when you have rain in other parts of the country, not the central and the western, not the India, the rain can bring in a lot of things dust along with it and deposit over the aggregate. So, therefore, it has to be stored in the right manner so that it does not get contaminated, aggregate do not get contaminated by dust. Seemand of course, we know that you have to keep it outside away from water. So, they are put in silos so is fly ash. So, all cementitious material and aggregates are stored in stored as mentioned and they are formed part of the batching plant. So, if you look at the components of batching plant first aggregate beans for various types of aggregate. So, they are stored in bins then you must have some kind of feeding mechanism might be scrapers, conveyors or waste to transfer the aggregate to the scales that is to the balance. Now, here there will not be a separate balance it must be a bucket straight away where you can go on the mass that is added will look at that a little bit more. So, feeding mechanism is the next one. Then you have balance or measuring system for the aggregates particularly and also the cement. Then you have you know continuing the components, cement silos and conveyors, screws or bucket can wear for transporting the cement from the silos because you go to take it to the balance and then from balance to the mixing machine. Then storage tank for water and water measuring system. If you have admixtures chemical admixtures some kind of a dispenser for chemical admixtures which will actually add to the system before mixing. So, these are the components now let us look at a batching plant straight away how does it look? This photograph shows a batching plant and as you can see these are the silos. In fact, it had two in cement silos and one silo for flyers. So, these are the silos vertical silos where these are you know metal silos where cements are stored. So, cement will be stored and it is all closed and from here the cement goes to the mixing machine. So, this is a flyers silo as it is shown two cement silos. One of them you can directly see the other one is not easily visible. So, this is one cement silo the other cement silo is there and flyers silo is somewhere here. And these are the aggregate bins. So, this is aggregate bin this is also aggregate bin. So, aggregate bin is here and aggregate bin is there and there is a scrapper which will actually be lifting the aggregates as we shall be seeing from the photograph taken from the other side. There is a scrapper. So, this scrapper is the one you know this is the scrapper. This is the scrapper. So, this has got actually a scrapping device which can scrap the be aggregate system close to the wall. These are the walls which are there you know this is the wall this you can see these are the walls. So, this wall there is another bin there. So, this is the wall for the other bin every bin has got a scrapper. So, scrapper would actually lift the aggregate or push the aggregate close to the wall and at the in the aggregate walls there is a gate there is a gates. So, this gate can open on to the bucket automatically can be a the computer control system and it can just put into the buckets. So, you can see that you know you can see further now more things in from the other side the flyer silo is now easily visible this is the flyer silo this is one cement silo other cement silo. So, these are the two cement silo and as you can see this is the control room you know there is a control room here this is a control room this is the control room. So, where you have a computer and through which everything is controlled and a screw conveyors. So, this one serves screw conveyors actually this particular one similarly there is another screw conveyors through which cement are shifted from the silo to the mixer machine silo to the mixer machine and you have got the mixer machine ending up somewhere ending up somewhere there you know mixer machine is somewhere here mixer machine is somewhere there. So, materials are actually this is a component this shows actually components of the batching plant currently used batching plant in India this is called star type and this is fairly common most of the places only thing is storage beans of the aggregate could differ from place to place, but basic structure remains more or less similar. So, this is typical batching plant plant type of course, can be cyclic or continuous now this is what I saw showed was a cyclic. So, every time the material is weighed and then put in the mixer machine continuous it will be continuously fed and weighed now that is a very first process and rarely used in Indian scenario unless you want to produce large quantity of concrete at a very short time. So, in a casting yard or something of that kind not very common in Indian scenario the other is classification could be automatic or manual. So, what we normally see is the cyclic type the one I showed in fact, the continuous type even the mixing should be continuous. So, it is a continuous feed onto a mixer mixing system which is cylindrical in nature and it enters from one side the the ingredients enter from one side of the mixer machine and its get just start from the other side. Now, type can also be automatic and manual this is automatic most of the batching plant today with the RMC plant should be automatic manual would be weighing would be manual weighing will be done manually small batching plant could be manual. What is important is accuracy of weighing accuracy of weighing. So, IS 456 says plus minus 2 percent for the quantity of cement measure that means, the accuracy should be within plus minus 2 percent you know and 3 percent from the quantity of aggregate water and that mixture quantity of aggregate water and that we have measured. So, accuracy level is 2 percent right and then measurement earlier the manual type would be mechanical liver system, but the automatic will have load cells load cells which normally we use in engineering lab arteries for you know measuring the load for example, if you want to measure the load deflection curve of a beam flexural member you would have used load cell to measure the load that you applied. It is nothing there can be several kind like piezoelectric type piezo sensing or electro dynamic type. So, the load that you apply additional load would actually induce some kind of electrical signals which is amplified etcetera etcetera. So, these are modern machines will have load cells mostly piezo type or some cases electro dynamic type right. So, that would measure the mass right and that usually measure the cumulative mass. So, you have a bucket which is fitted with load cell and each ingredient let us say if you add cement in the beginning then if you add cement the mass of the cement that is gone would be measured then you add aggregate to it. So, cumulative mass would normally be measured not individually in the bucket and load cell does this. Then discharge from the storage and where hoppers is through gates generally. So, these gates are in case of cement is the screw converse which will bring it and there must be gates which will get closed down. So, they are actually operated by compressed air cylinder. Similarly, for aggregates there are gates at the wall that I showed you earlier and these gates should open operated by compressed air. So, they will open only when there is a computer control system the control system says or dictates it to be open. As soon as the required weight or the mass has been loaded on to the bucket it will get closed. So, they are the automatic type and this is what is used most of these days you know and should be used in engineered concrete. The manual concrete is not really engineered concrete, but a web etching can be done manually where you have simple lever on which you move the weights move the you know the some weight into the lever arm of the lever arm and it will tell you how much weight you have raised. So, it is a kind of analog handling it is possible, but they are only meant for small sorts of you know small concrete. In fact, the most of the engineered concrete should be produced only with automatic batching otherwise your quality may not be very good. If you want better quality control it is desired that automatic control system should be used because today you have RMC plants available, but of course with RMC with appropriate kind of quality control is important and this RMC truck you can have it in a centralized batch centralized batching plant you produce the concrete batching and mixing plant you produce the concrete transport it through a mixed trucks as we shall be discussing in our next lecture and deliver it to the site. So, events relatively smaller quantities can be produced in a mechanized way especially in most of the towns most of the capital state capitals have got RMC plants today and even slightly smaller towns. So, with the transportation system improving road system improving it is engineered concrete should largely be produced through automated batching plant rather than manual. However, batching manual batching plant weighing is done by manual means. So, you should preset the desired batch weights and earlier it was done through punch card or digital switches or rotating dials, but today it would be also computer control. So, you just put those number in your computer you know keyboard and that is that is it. So, it can be easily done today using automatic control system and that is what would be the best for the engineered concrete. Moisture gauges usually electrical resistivity type, but microwave moisture gauges are available which you just insert onto the aggregate and you know it will tell you what is the moisture content because it is desirable the total time moisture content of the aggregates are measured and corrections are applied in your mixed proportion because added moisture will be then less because some moisture is there in the aggregate and total aggregate quantity will be more because aggregate content moisture. So, if you have SSD condition aggregate how much quantity you need you have to adjust depending upon the moisture condition and therefore, moisture should be measured all the time. Water is most commonly measured through flow meters although in some plants water can also be weighed. So, flow meters can be weighed, but you can you know volumetrically you do measure. There must be this must be regularly calibrated as regular routine practice and some time you might do even specialist check of the weighing process because otherwise you can have problem with the quality control right kind of proportions you are not giving you will not get the right kind of properties. So, the system should be such that you should be able to check the calibration without too much difficulty right. So, that is the batching process IS 4925 gives you batching tolerances many codes or guidelines gives you batching tolerances in elaborate manner, but this is for Indian standard. Cemented rather cementitious material it is plus minus 1 percent batching tolerances you know like the tolerance in the measuring system and all that how much error it can have it is linked to the accuracy that we talked about. Water by volume or weight is plus minus 1 percent and aggregate plus minus 2 admixtures plus minus 3 percent and this is meant for 30 percent of the you know maximum minimum weight that is 30 percent of the scale capacity divided by divided by the weight tolerances given in the previous table. For example, in case of let us say I have a maximum capacity is maximum capacity is something like you know about 1000 kg is a maximum maximum capacity of my weighing machine weighing system. So, the cement the tolerance that has been specified in the previous table will be applicable to 0.3 in 2000 which means that 300 kg divided by 1 percent is the weighing tolerance. So, I should this should be applicable to 300 kg of the cement minimum cement you know if you have minimum weight anything anything above this you can actually apply this tolerances, but anything less than this this tolerances are not really applicable. So, this tolerances are meant for 30 percent of the scale capacity dividing by weighing tolerance mentioned earlier. Well for aggregate this might be 300 divided by 2 so 150 kg. So, accuracy required it is related to that actually is tolerances given. So, lesser the tolerance you should be measuring more so that the error is less. So, uniform concrete this is actually required all this are required you should always be measuring within tolerances and decoult tolerance should be low we should be measure it as accurately as possible. The reason is you know concrete should be as uniform as possible. What is an uniform concrete the one that exhibits less variation if the variation of property let us say strength variation is large it is not an uniform concrete. If the slum variation is large it is not an uniform concrete and uniform concrete will have less variation in properties such as slum, strength every other properties that you are looking at air content aggregate content and so on so forth. So, it should be less variable it should be as uniform as possible. So, if your proportions are varying that is your batching is not proper right batching is varying one time you have put in x quantity of aggregate next time you put x plus delta x quantity of aggregate. Now, this delta x must be as small as possible if delta x is large the variation in the proportions will be large. So, if this proportion variation is large concrete is unlikely to be very uniform you know in its properties also. Now, let us concentrate on two things one is the cement content and water cement ratio then you can understand how it affects for example, delta c is the errors in cement and water measurements all right this will result in higher strength variation because we know strength is a function of water to cement ratio I am talking of ordinary Portland cement concrete for just for the purpose of understanding and explanation. So, proper batching therefore, if I have less delta c less delta w I will have more uniform concrete less variation in strength better quality quality means less variation. So, proper batching ensures better quality quality should be less variation strength should not vary. So, if you have you know if you desire to provide a concrete of strength let us say with 35 MPa or 37 MPa I should be this concrete I generate or I produce should have the strength 37 MPa plus minus 2 MPa let us say in one case another case 37 MPa with plus minus 5 MPa. The later is poorer in terms of quality 37 plus minus 2 which means that 35 to 39 is better quality because whatever I have desired whatever I have wished I am getting that kind of concrete whatever I have promised I am giving that kind of concrete I am generating producing that kind of concrete 37 minus 5 is 32 and plus 5 42. So, if I am producing concrete from 32 to 42 the quality is relatively poorer because quality is just by the variation that you have you know whatever you said you should be giving this well this has got lot of implications otherwise we may be looking it to that sometime later on. So, this is related to proper batching is related to batching is related to quality for example, you can see this you know quality is related to variation lower variation better quality and if your proportion is not maintained well then you will have poorer quality more error in measurements introduces you know lack in quality or makes the quality poor because the dispersion is more let us see just look at mathematically simple algebra no problem you know for example, if I am looking at change in DW by C water cement ratio variation in water cement ratio I mean I am just calling it a DX. So, X is water cement ratio DW by C. So, it is a partial derivative and therefore, it will be given as W by C variation with respect to water multiplied by delta W plus from basic basic calculus we understand this partial derivative of with respect to cement W by C multiplied by delta C. Now, variation of W by C with water will be given by 1 by C into delta W and variation of variation of W by C partial derivative of W by C with respect to C is given as minus W divided by C square delta C. So, you see this is my in my errors in delta W weighing of water and this is the error in weighing of cement for example, W 1 minus W 2 and delta W is a variation in difference in water content and delta C is a variation in cement content. So, my water cement ratio higher this value higher this value this water cement ratio will vary more and strength is a function of water cement ratio strength is a function of water cement ratio. So, higher this value higher this value actually more will be my variation DX water cement ratio will vary more and if the water cement ratio vary more higher variation in you know delta W by C if it is high high delta W by C it means higher strength strength variation also will be higher strength variation will be higher right strength variation will be higher. So, if the strength variation is higher which means that my mean strength you know this is related to actually standard deviation this should be sigma 2 actually this is it is related to standard deviation in fact, I can show the strength variation will be 1.65 into delta sigma. So, I will have higher delta sigma strength variation is more I will have higher delta sigma strength variation is more strength varies from lower value to higher value standard deviation will be more statistical standard deviation will be more and therefore, my actual increase in strength or mean strength increase this is given by for mean strength remember mean strength was target mean strength FM was written as FCK plus 1.65 sigma. So, if the sigma is higher mean strength will be higher mean strength in one case is more than that of in other case and therefore, I might end up actually getting difference in mean strength delta FM mean strength variation will be higher if the standard deviation change in standard deviation is more. So, standard deviation higher variation in higher standard deviation higher standard deviation results in you know more the standard deviation variation more will be my strength variation what all I am trying to point out you do better weighing or standard deviation will lower and if the standard deviation is lower my F's F M will be lower for the same FCK for the same grade of concrete my FM will be lower and how much lower that will be given into K that is 1.65 into standard deviation difference. So, lower standard deviation is always better lower standard deviation is always better lower standard deviation is always better. Now, feed should be driven feed something like this is a good feed you can see that it is feeding through a conveyor belt of course, this is another batching plant not the earlier one it is a good feed feed shows into the bucket feed to the bucket should be driven feed like this coming almost as a ribbon and some pre mixing of the material is good before it comes to the feed. So, this was related to batching importance of batching now, let us look at mixing. It is the process you know we produce uniform concrete. So, we have different materials of different specific gravity different shape and then we mix them up to produce a kind of uniform cohesive mix. Therefore, I should choose my equipment and method in such a manner that is is kept effectively capable of effectively mixing concrete material containing larger space specified aggregate to produce uniform mixture for lowest slum. It is actually difficult to mix dry material dry material if it is wet it is easier to make a cohesive mix out of it. So, lowest slum means least water system least paste and water system and I should choose the mixing machine in such a manner that whatever lowest slum material I am going to use or concrete I am going to use it is able to mix that as uniform as possible and larger the size of the aggregate the size variation is more if it is paste only two materials cement and water or cementitious material and water that is easy to mix. If you aggregate it is shape sand is relatively difficult to mix now you have three component of three varieties three sizes and if it is still coarse aggregate it is still difficult to mix. So, larger the aggregates largest aggregate and it will have a tendency to go away you know. So, segregate also large particle has a tendency to fly away. So, it is difficult to mix. So, my mixture machine should be chosen in such a manner that is able to mix uniformly the lowest slum and aggregate you know with maximum size of aggregate. Again I can have cyclic or batch mixers and continuous mixers. So, cyclic or batch mixers is what is commonly we use and continuous mixers are used only in very large site where production requirement is very high capacity has to be very high and I should be producing continuously. And remember continuous mixing is much more automated system in a casting air to a production capacity is extremely high and I need very sophisticated system for continuous mixing. It is usually similar cylindrical comes from one side the indian shall come from one side and rotating cylinder through which it will be mixed and by the time the indian says moved from one end to the other it is already thoroughly mixed and will be discharged. So, that is a continuous mixture normally not seen much in indian scenario I am not hard upon. But, the commonly used mixtures are gravity mixtures. So, what they do they actually bring the material up and then they are forced to go down. So, some kind of force movement is used for mixing and the gravity mixtures can be tilting or non tilting type. They are not the very best type you know normally tilting type of mixtures has been used quite often for small concluding and largely in Indian scenario before the batching plant where batching plant is not used actually used tilting type of mixtures they are not the best mixtures counter for mixture of open pan type of mixtures are the much better one and that is what is used in most of the batching plants right. So, tilting type of mixture will look like this you know it will look something like this. So, you have got some baffles here you will have some baffles here you know baffles here and material is fed in and it is at inclined shape the baffles should cause them to move. So, this is baffles should be of different shape blades and it actually rotates it rotates actually rotates all right it rotates about this axis it will rotate and by this rotation up and down also this movement the mixing is done and when you want to discharge you just drop it downward in this direction. So, you tilt it and it is dropped and that is very commonly used small type mixtures they do not do a very good job as I told you. So, they are gravity type of mixtures what the baffle does baffle lifts of the material just puts it here and they drop down on their own and this is how first it will you know like so it by this repeated lifting up material and dropping it actually causes mixing and this baffles and there you know. So, it is and then finally, discharging is through the tilt actually. This is tilting drum this is exactly the previous one what I talked about. So, it rotates actually tilting axis about which it can rotate I mean this is the rotation axis you know this can rotate about this it rotates in this direction. So, material goes up and down you feed from here and you know when you want to discharge you tilt it and it will discharge. So, this is the tilting axis this axis it can actually go like this whole system can come downwards and discharge. So, this is commonly used mixture for you know small concrete. This is the process filling the mixture when you feel from this top this can rotate about this then axis of rotation this is where the mixing occurs and then finally, discharging is through this. So, this is commonly used mixture type but normal big making batching plan this is non tilting type actually. Here you charge from here and rotate it rotates while mixing a counter rotation would actually cause it to discharge through this one this is normally closed then you open it up. So, the counter flow causes or the flow causes this to discharge out there is of course, the motor or whatever it is not very commonly used not very commonly used not very commonly used. This is the non tilting type you feed it this is closed and when you want to discharge you can just open this there is a short here. So, this is the feed of the material and that is how actually this is this is your non tilting type you know mixture not very common. This is what is most common this is what is most common. So, you have a rotating drum which will rotate and these are the blades this is the blades actually this is a inner blade this is a smaller blade outer blade blade and this you know relative motion of the drum and the blades. So, therefore, your concrete is here here is your concrete and you know this is this rotates about this axis. So, drum can rotate baffles can remain steady or drum is steady baffle rotates and this causes this is at extreme periphery this is at inner side and this causes the mixing to take place. For example, you can have counter shaft so, there is a baffle here right pan is fixed this rotates this rotates this rotates right scrappers this scrappers are moving. So, this moves in this one shaft is at the center this is also center of the shaft and this this is rotating drum also is rotating. So, this this is this scrapper can be fixed sorry in this can drum rotates scrappers are fixed in this one dual shaft and scrapper moving this one moves and a drum pan is fix this pan is fixed this is fix in this case also this fixed in this case pan fixed scrapper is moving. So, here scrapper moving pan fixed in this one pan rotates scrapper is fixed in this one Pane rotates scrapper also rotates so scrapper pan rotates scrapper fix but the shaft is also rotating. So, this shaft rotates, so there is a kind of planetary motion and in this one planetary motion this one shaft rotates in this manner and you know pan of course, is fixed. So, you can have different kind of action, but most common type is the one that I showed earlier a photograph of the same is like this. See for example, here you can see as you can see in this particular one the scrapers, this is the scrapper there is a inner scrapper which you could have seen before, inner scrapper which will look like this. Inside scrapper is the inner one, this is the inner one is scrapper and then you have got the the scrappers again outer one and then finally, so you have inner scrappers here and scrappers there. This is where the shaft plant is fixed in this particular plant is fixed, so this is one type scrapper, this is other scrappers, the smaller scrapers you can see somewhere up there, this is these other scrapper, this is thisits scrapper, so this is the inner scrapper, this is the inner scrapper, this is the inner scrapper, this is the inner scrapper, this is the inner scrapper. So, drum rotates and The pan is fixed here. There is scrapers of the two kinds. You can see the bottom of the scraper somewhere there. You can see the bottom of the scraper somewhere there. You see this is the bottom of the scraper and similar sort of baffles you know scrapers are there. So, they rotate, they will rotate and scoop the material out. Put it in the inner side and as the rotation continues you know it mixes from outer to inner one and this is a much more efficient than gravity type of mixers. So, this is the commonly used pan mixers in case of batching plants which are used today. As I told you continuous mixer is one usually non tilting drums which crude type blades rotating in the middle of the drum and you have feed from one side. Drum might be tilted slightly downwards towards the discharge opening with a slope usually of 15 percent and you feed from one side usually very short mixing time depends upon slope useful in low slam pavement concrete. So, if you are producing large quantity of concrete this might be useful one you feed from one side and then it is a continuous batching also continuous mixing also feed from one side and the screw type of blades that causes the mixing as it rotates the rotating drum rotates and then it discharges at the end by the time actually the mixing has been finished. So, you know the most important thing is the uniformity of the mix. We have seen that batching is also required for uniformity. Now, how do you do uniformity test? So, we actually take samples of fresh concrete from the mixture at different stages of its discharge from a given batch. For example, either it is in terms of quantity or let us say in terms of time. So, let us say it takes about you know it takes about 2 minutes time to discharge. So, I can take from the first 15 percent of the discharge 2 minute time uniformly discharging let us say right. So, I have got actually 120 minutes and 15 percent of that will be 18 minutes you know sorry 120 seconds 2 minutes means 180 say 120 seconds. So, I can take from first 18 seconds I take some concrete and cast samples out of it test for slump, cast samples cubes etcetera etcetera. Similarly, I can take from the another next 15 percent or next 20 percent. Now, next 15 percent would be from 19 to 36 seconds or I can take from the last 15 percent which will be actually 102 minutes to 102 seconds to 120 seconds. So, I can go on taking samples at different time of the discharge right and measure their properties and through this actually I will be able to do uniformity test and I will make actually test several things I will just see I will just talk about that in a minute. Now, charging of the mixture should be pre blending and re-burning effect which I showed earlier the field and mixing time 1 minute is required 4.75 meter cube capacity this is given as per the code. But we will talk about this a little bit more let us just talk about uniformity of the mixing you know typically if you look at feeding we look at uniformity. But if you see feeding first stage is dry mixing I put in dry mixing you know this is time versus solid component in the mixer machine first I just feed in during this period I am feeding and here I am doing a little bit of dry mixing then again I am loading but in this case some water I have loaded water during this period I have loaded the water and this is somewhat wet mixing then I load the final quantity of water and it is total mixing. So, this is your true mixing period and then this is the discharge period this is the discharge period. So, typically first I do a little bit of dry mixing then add water. So, add the solids dry mixing then add water also some solid also water and then finally, all are added in this zone and then total mixing period goes on and then there is a discharge period. So, this is typically the sequence of mixing or solid components component in the solid component in the mixer machine. So, you can see first I added some solid no more solid here here solid plus water then this is again some more solid and then continuous mixing here and then finally, this is the discharge. So, this is how the mixing goes on total mixing time looks like this and IS 1 9 25 9 68 previous 1.75 meter go this is in IS 456 2000 but 4 9 25 is elaborate it says mixing time for each batch of material except the full amount of water provided that all the mixing water shall be introduced before 1 fourth of the mixing time elaps shall be 1 and half 2 and 2 and half minutes respectively for mixer capacity up to 2 meter cube 3 meter cube 4 meter cube respectively. IS 456 of course, is very simple it says that overall minimum mixing time should be 2 minutes. So, this is the guideline given in the code 1 4 9 25 the earlier one I gave it from I think it is some kind of consideration available in literature you know 0.75 meter cube at time is given for additional each 25 meter 0.25 meter cube the additional time is given in the previous slides as we have seen right like something like you know we can we can go back actually we can go back to the previous one this one mixing time that is 0.71 minute for 0.75 meter cube capacity and for additional 2 5 meter cube is required for you know 0.25 meter minutes is required for each 0.75 meter cube that means, you have got about 1.5 meter cube will require 1.25 minutes if you have 2 meter cube will require about 1.25 plus another 2 5 that is 1.5 minutes whereas, the IS 456 says that nothing less than 2 minutes you should be mixing which is simple, but then the other one the you know like the I 4 9 25 tells you 1 and half minutes for 2 meter cube same as what I said earlier and for 3 meter cube 2 minutes and 4 meter cube for 2 and half minutes for 4 meter cube. So, these are the mixing time, but we will see the basic basis behind all this, but first of all let us see why I you know I need sufficient time because increasing the mixing time may result in more uniform distribution of hydrogen product because it causes abrasion over the surface of the aggregate and therefore, removes the hydrogen product and some of the hydrogen product and further gets exposed to water new hydrogen product would get deposited on top of the aggregates and so on. So, it actually causes a better dispersion and more uniform scenario and therefore, higher compressive strength, but there is a point of diminishing return if you go on increasing this it may not increase the strength proportionally and sometime it can even cause decrease all right. So, this is there is a limit up to which you can do it because mixing may cause over grinding of the material too much of abrasion between aggregates and some cases may increase in the proportion of fines if the weeks are aggregates are weak quite often excessive mixing leads to segregation in case of linear concrete. So, mixing time should be optimal not too much high we will come to this mixing curve a little bit later, but just look at performance of the mixture I said that you can take from first 15 percent and last 15 percent or in between any range and the variation should be least. So, uniformity of the mix is measured by measuring workability of fresh concrete at different points of the discharge then you also measure the density of the fresh concrete measure the air content of the fresh concrete taken at different point in the discharge time of discharge you know you take from the 12 seconds out of 120 minute let us say discharge time let us say is 2 minutes. So, first 12 seconds you take one sample next 12 second take one other sample you can go on taking 10 samples and find out the variation, but if one way is to take from first 15 percent and last 15 percent because you know at the end it is tendency of aggregates to come first they will get discharge first the paste will come last. So, particularly in tilting type of mixtures if it is bottom discharge this problem is much less it comes out all to equally you know, but tilting type of mixtures aggregates will come first paste here as NMZ to come first. So, uniformity can be measured from first 15 percent of the mix and last 15 percent and variation should not be too much. So, compressive strength of cubes you can measure coarse aggregate content you can measure by analysis of fresh concrete you know you simply wash it do wet sieving put it on a sieve of 4.75 micron size M M size 4.75 M M size put all the concrete put a water jet coarse aggregate will be remaining fine aggregate will go out. So, coarse aggregate content you can measure easily analysis of fresh concrete water to powder ratio you can find out because whatever is going out you can just again put it to a 75 micron sieve and whatever is remaining when it is a sand rest is water to powder and you can actually find out you know the analysis of fresh concrete can be done find out the cement content water to powder ratio powder content you can find out by doing analysis of fresh concrete. So, actually what I have stocking off you can have workability density air content compressive strength coarse aggregate content water to powder ratio powder content those kind of fresh analysis of fresh concrete done and you can measure them and workability and strength can be measured at appropriate time. And then see what is the variation if the variation is less you are very happy it is within a limit in fact, code specifies the limit and it also says that to define a mix to be uniform maybe 5 out of the 6 or 4 out of the 6 or 6 out of the 5 7 should be satisfied you know the various code tells you differently. So, 4 9 2 5 is quite strange and it says 6 out of the 7 or I think it is 5 out of the 7 should be satisfied the ranges are given how much the variability of workability can vary by how much how much slum variation is possible how much density variation is possible this is a given and number of test it should satisfy out of this 7 is also specific. I have not actually included this because this will become too long. So, one can check this use the code and decides test the mixer machine to find out whether it is a it is giving uniform mixer mix or no. Rylem criteria of course, is something like this you know it very it depends upon what is called coefficient of variation which is standard deviation from different samples measurement measurement from different samples divided by the mean. So, you find out coefficient of variation because it is standard deviation COV COV is standard deviation divided by mean. So, you find out mean strength mean water to powder and also find out the standard deviation from 10 such samples taken from a single batch and if the coefficient of variation is less than 66 percent you say it is ordinary if it is less than 5 percent then you call performance is very good I mean just good and first one is ordinary performance and high performance is if it is less than 3 percent. There are several other criteria has given I have I just included few of them fine aggregate less than 0.25 mm size fine aggregate less than 0.25 mm size all right that is your you know 250 micron. So, that again the coefficient of variation should be less than 6 percent to be ordinary less than 5 percent you know and less than 3 percent it should be I think there is a mistake there this should be 3 percent it should be high. Similarly, coefficient of variation for d m is the mean particle size minus d m by 2 mean particle size minus 2. So, proportion of the particle belonging to particular size you find out and if it is less than 20 percent 15 percent 10 percent air content residual air content by mass if it is less than 2 percent with a standard deviation less than 1 you call it ok performance if it is less than 1 percent and standard deviation is less than 0.5 you call it high. Similar other criteria are given I have only taken a part of the table. So, therefore, performance are just from the variation right. So, more variation means poor performance less variation means better performance uniform to other mix that you mix animation produces uniform concrete less variation that is a better one. In fact, this should be monitored from time to time in a computer controlled engineered batching plan because otherwise it does not make sense you know you have part of it is computer controlled if you are not checking routine checking of a mixer machine and batching batching tolerances and all that calibration of the batching plan mixer machine uniformity this should form the part of the quality control system if you want to produce good concrete because then only you will have concrete most of the time uniform right. Otherwise it will actually introduce standard deviation in the properties mixing time I was talking about we can study this from coefficient of variation for example, if you look at strength and variance in strength variance of variance is standard deviation square. So, strength actually increases but it becomes table here does not increase further. Similarly, the variance is nothing but square of the standard deviation it reduces as you increase the mixing time but does not actually reduce beyond that in fact, it might even increase because you have fine and fines might increase. So, therefore, what we see is that there is an optimal mixing time and uniformity of the mixing is very important optimal mixing time for example, code says 2 minutes. So, preferably 2 minutes little bit just above 2 minutes is fine or the guidelines that is given in 4 to 5 or otherwise available in literature they must be used but do not one should not actually prolong the mixing too long this can result in higher variation variance and strength. So, higher variation uniformity will be less and uniformity test we have discussed. So, this is a aspect of mixing and batching and they are all related to quality control better you know if you do a good batching that means, proportions are all the time or all are same the errors in measurements are less calibration are being checked regularly. So, it is within tolerances the accuracy is within tolerances that means, that proportions if you are measuring 100 kg your batching or weighing machine showing 100 kg it will be 100 or plus minus 1 percent. So, say let us say 99 to 101 actual it will be 99 to 101. So, if it is going beyond it much higher let us say 95 to 105 but you are thinking that it is about 100 it means that it is actually your actual proportion is different it would lead to more variation in the strength in your final product or more variation in slump of your final product. So, batching is very very important and mixing then is very very important when mixtures are definitely better and discharge from the bottom is better tilting mixtures will can cause segregation because larger particle can go away mixing may not be uniform right the mixing more uniform the mixture uniformity of the mix that is coming out of the mixture machine should be check. Important aspect is the time of mixing type of mixture and time of mixing time of mixing too long may not be good whatever is specified in the code that one may add up to. So, that way then one can produce good concrete quality control is related to both. So, you have looked into the concrete production process what are the steps involved then you have looked into the batching process and it is important in producing good quality concrete engineer at quality concrete and then we have looked into mixing process for producing uniform quality of concrete. So, that is what has been part of our discussion right now and with this actually we conclude our discussion. === Lecture 18 Transcript === . Having looked at mixing, now we should look into transporting the concrete and therefore, in this lecture 2 for the module 5, we shall be looking into Redmixt concrete which combines actually mixing or at least part mixing and transporting together and transporting concrete. So, outline of this top or this lecture would be concrete production in terms of Redmixt concrete and transporting concrete. So, what is Redmixt concrete? You see Redmixt concrete production is a process whereby mixing and transportation of concrete can be combined together and the product is delivered to the site at times right into the mold straight away. So, therefore, it combines mixing and transporting can combine mixing and transporting and it can deliver. So, you have a plant batching plant which is far away that is what we discussed the batching plant yesterday the mixing and the batching is done at the central plant can be done at the central plant and then it can be transported and delivered straight away to the mold or close to the mold or it can be pumped directly from the truck output you know from the discharge of the RMC truck it can be simply pumped into the mold itself. So, that is what is defined as Redmixt concrete. Now, Indian standard IS 4126 it defines Redmixt concrete as concrete delivered at site or into the purchasers vehicle in a plastic condition and requiring no further treatment before being placed in position in which it is to set and harden. So, no processing is required it can be delivered in plastic condition and it will not require any further treatment being placed in position in which it is set and harden I mean the compaction of the as they would be required. So, that is Redmixt concrete definition wise and you know there can be first of all mixing can be done at while transporting you know some plants which are called central plant. So, you can have a central plant may have mixing in the truck. So, batching is done at the plant and mixing can be done on the truck itself fully and such a vehicle would be called at truck mixer like the one shown here which will have a water tank and of course, the mixing you know vessel or mixing drum on which mixing will be taking place and you have a blades inside bevels which will cause the mixing. So, whole mixing will be done here. So, in between what you can do is the batching can be done quite early and it is the truck will carry the ingredients and write proportions and somewhere on during the transit it can start mixing. Obviously, since mixing requires lot of power then the payload of the truck is likely to be less plus also it is to carry the water separately. So, this is not only cleaning water but mixing this is mixing water tank and these are the discharge shoots this is discharge shoot and you know this is actually for inlet hopper through which your ingredients are putting. So, this could be a truck mixer and agitated truck might look something like this. So, which does not do mixing so mixing at the plant mixing at the plant batching and mixing at the plant and it only simply agitates the concrete to keep it plastic and then delivers to the side. So, you can see that internal construction somewhat there is a spirals through which actually the blades and then this is the of course outer peripheral drum periphery and then tank for cleaning essentially since it is an agitated truck. So, this is cleaning water only is just for cleaning inlet hopper and discharge is through this. So, agitated truck only agitates and its RPM is much less you know around three or so 3 to 4 whereas mixing could be 7 RPM and so on. Batching and mixing of the plant and only transporting and during transportation it keeps on agitating the concrete here. Keeps on agitating the concrete here you know keeps on agitating the concrete here, this concrete is agitated this concrete is agitated you know it keeps on agitated the concrete that is here you know this concrete is agitated. So, that is agitated truck now, modern ones would be actually combinations of all. And you know there is usually some mixing can be done. So, typically a truck would look like this. Now, you can see that there is a sort of a kind of you know cloth cover here as basically sort of a hazy and type of cloth, jute or similar sort of thing which can keep a lot of water absorbed. This is covered the drum is covered with that. The reason being this is in the hot condition, tropical condition of Delhi or in northern India. So, this is kept wet. So, that inside material does not get heated up because of the radiation and the temperature outside. So, that is a truck that you can see and you can see the hopper you know this is a discharge hopper the inlet hopper and the truck as we have seen earlier inside there will be baffle and mixture. So, this could be agitator come mixing also they can mix both rotation capacity should be there. Typically shrink mix concrete that means, is mostly mixed in the plant and then if required some mixing can be done at the site as well. So, there is another view of the same one you can see the discharge should easily this is the discharge should and this is where it is getting it will get loaded and the cleaning water tank is here the cleaning water tank is here and you know this is what you see in most places some of the trucks are like this. So, there is an extra shoot through discharge can be you know you can enhance the shoot which can be connected here and discharge can take place here. Generally they call it transit truck mixer or transit mixer this is what they call it. So, this is getting loaded actually it is getting loaded through the hopper it is getting loaded through this hopper concrete is getting loaded. You know this is through the hopper it is getting loaded sorry it is getting loaded know this this is a silo concrete getting loaded through this hopper here you know through this is actually getting loaded and next diagram would show possibly this is showing the inlet and the outlet shoot. So, which it is actually discharged into a pump that is standing here as you can see it can discharge into the pump and there is another truck waiting in the line next to discharge and so on so forth. The major issue is a uniformity of the concrete and loss of slum since you are transporting it and agitating it uniformity should be maintained and loss of slum should not be there you know the setting characteristics of the concrete while setting characteristics to the cement is one issue setting characteristics of the concrete is the other issue which is related to slum loss because you know you add ad mixture. So, it is not the cement setting it is related to cement setting but something more than that because not only the setting of cement but then you are adding some kind of admixtures if it is a retarder it might you know make the setting time longer concrete will set for a longer period of time set after a longer period of time and if it is an accelerator it will actually make it to set much faster. So, slum loss is a major issue one of the major issue that is because you make it to you know it transport over a long distance. Now, most of the codes what they do they actually restrict the time of haul to 1 to 2 hours of course depends upon the ambient condition in a hot warm condition higher temperature you know time of haul could be lesser because setting would be faster and that is why there was a cover you might cover the drum white colored in this case it was some sort of a hazy and type of cloth which was shown here and the maximum number of revolutions sometime is restricted or most of the code actually restricts it is at the mixing speed you know of the mixing drum is limited to 300 revolution at rigitating speed and at mixing speed 100. So, 100 revolution maximum or 300 so 1 to 2 hours or you know 300 revolutions at a rpm of 3 to 4 which are agitating rpm and then about 7 or so which is actually mixing rpm there actually restricted to 100. So, otherwise you know there will be sufficient loss of slum. Now, typically the slum loss might look like this typically slum loss slice might some results shows just loss of slum during agitating at 4 revolution per minute. But this is this is some work done pretty early if you see current once it might be quite different because you can have retarder switch can actually prolong it but not 100 mm slum coming down to nearly 0 in about 6 to 7 hours. But there will be some loss of slum that is possible. Now, if you want to take care of this what you can do is you can keep the initial slum high you keep the initial slum high such that 20 reaches to the side actual slum is desired sum or whatever you are supposed to deliver you know slum at the delivery. So, initial slum can be kept high other way is to use retarder which will you know prolong it but keep the initial slum high retarder will prolong prolong it. But if there is of somewhere there is a traffic jam or something and there the truck is actually stuck then in between adding water just like that you know without any kind of experimentation done early or without you know by default if I may say so or adding at mixtures this is not this is not produce an engineered concrete. If it is known that you have to have a longer period of time of travel and you may have to add some kind of a retarder in between and re agitate it then this must be first checked at the plant level the thermoch will be the loss of slum otherwise now negative effect of adding at mixtures of water is loss in strength for example if you look at this you know this will show you kind of loss in strength. So, the data number of data which are there and it will depend upon of course the temperature. So, if it is lower temperature if it is lower temperature it strength loss you know depending upon temperature of concrete it which is this is a diagram of 32 degree centigrade. So, it will depend upon temperature as as how much water you have added. So, if you add water there will be strength loss and as much as if you have added 50 kg per meter cube in some case is an example I mean typical it is not all the time. So, if you add 10 kg per meter cube or 20 or you know 10 kg you can see about 5 percent loss 20 kg maybe 20 percent strength loss and 30 kg somewhere around 30 percent strength loss you know. So, percentage strength loss could be higher. So, by adding water all retarder again it can of course, retarder can have other kind of effect also it might results in segregation and similar sort of problem but so, adding retarder in between by default is not the best thing to do and it should not be left to the truck driver or you know somebody who is not very qualified. If it is to be done if it is to be done because of traffic situation or similar sort of thing this must be actually done early in the laboratory simulated and do a test and see what happens to your strength if you have added an admixture in between if you have added water in between obviously, the strength will be reduced. So, if you have added admixture what is effect on strength what is an effect if you add even some water it will also affect your strength because water cement ratio is likely to change it might increase the slump. So, what you do you actually you know design for a higher strength that even if there is some amount of strength loss finally, the strength at the delivery point the concrete which will be there at the delivery point this must you know this must actually produce I mean this must actually yield same strength or result in same strength what is desired. So, this is important to understand by default thing should not have be done it should be done by doing an experimentation earlier if there is an extreme case of traffic situation which is quite often happens in Indian scenario and but just like that without any kind of testing without any kind of pre verification admixture should not be added neither one should add water and remix it because there will be strength loss you might get the slump back but there will be strength loss. So, this point has to be kept in mind. So, two issues are very important uniformity of the mix which I talked earlier yesterday I talked about I mean last class last module we talked about the mix you know uniform mix uniformity of the mix produce from mixed emission. So, you have to see that the RMSC delivery of the concrete from the RMSC truck is as uniform as possible and I should we should check from time to time the uniformity. So, this is one issue loss of slump is the other issue which one must tackle in case of red mix concrete. Now, red mix concrete gives you a big advantage because it is done at the plant. So, since you are doing at the plant level in a factory sort of a situation. So, actually if it is done in a systematic manner with a with a batching in a batching plant or you know it is almost like a factory like situation all the modern pre cussed industrial have much more sophisticated system. But red mix concrete if it is done in an engineered way it can give you much better quality concrete. But if it is done again not an engineered way like mixing at mix at any time not checking continuously monitoring the results that you are obtaining then it is again as bad as manual construction. But it gives you a chance to actually make concrete quality much better and much faster of course, done you know it it it simply you know you can do away with the space in the site storing at the site. And if you look at the cost even slightly costlier there is no problem because the cost of aggregates and cost of storing the aggregates cost of getting the aggregate cost of inventory management purchasing etcetera all these are reduced. So, all this cost should be taken together if one is like you know one would like to compare the RMSC cost with the site mix. Any other quality question is very much there and therefore, RMSC is always a preferred situation then a site mix concrete because space and everything put together. And small quantity of concrete in large number of places one single RMSC plant can deliver. But it has to be engineered concrete must be done in an engineered way in a systematic engineered way and not just manually almost like manual treatment same treatment as a manual concrete should not be given should be handled with knowledgeable and qualified people. Quite often this you know this this point you cannot ignore because if you want to maintain the good quality of concrete people should be knowledgeable and all systematic procedure should be. So, that is about RMSC the other kind of now we can look into other kind of transporting you know methods of concrete and obviously, many issue of course, remain that it should during transportation it should not segregate. So, basically handling tends to produce actually segregation and loss of slum especially when distance is long and that is to be that is to be seen you know the RMSC of course, combine some transporting together with mixing. But there kind of other kind of mixing procedure can be adopted in large site especially and even sometime in small sites. Today in a mechanized process many of those transportation method which I am talking about may not be may become redundant because if you use a pump together with you know truck transit truck transit mixer and so on so forth most of this can be eliminated out. But however, some cases one may have to go to various kind of trans methods one have to adopt various kind of methods for transporting concrete. So, while ever whichever method is being selected one must see that there is no segregation therefore, method of transporting and placing concrete which permits the use of most you know the driest mix dri mix drier mix that is to be better. Now, one issue related to of course, adoption of pump is that the concrete must be pumpable but if it is not pumpable then you cannot pump. So, one of these methods you may have to adopt. What are the methods? These methods are disturbed directly into forms through short shoot or for a very small lead manually in containers. Not the best thing not very desirable thing short shoot is a better one manually discharge is not the best thing right. But even if you have to if you have to do really then certain precautions are to be taken we will go through this by boroughs wheel boroughs and handcuts you know these are the wheel boroughs and handcuts this have been used for quite quite often earlier and power boroughs or power boggies then dumpers and trucks. Now, non agitating trucks are not the best thing to do it should be agitating trucks, but we look into some of them quickly the process then you have monorail, elevating tower and wires buckets or skips operated by cranes or overhead cableways, belt conveyors and boom conveyors then you have got agitated truck we have already talked about. So, these are the kind of methods we have and the concrete is used under water or somewhere in the deep trench concrete pumps and pneumatic places are the other ones which are used. So, let us look at some of the issues related to the former ones that is our our discharge directly discharge directly into forms you know discharge directly should be avoided as much as possible concrete should not be dropped more than 2 meters because if you drop the concrete from a height you know and especially if the mix is dry larger particles has a tendency to go further away for example, all the large particles will have tendency supposing you are dropping a concrete full from here you are trying to drop them now large particles will have a tendency to come here smaller paste will have a tendency to fall here. So, large particle go there large particles so it is desirable that this height should not be should be less than you know height should be h should not be less than h should be always less than 2 meters I mean h should not be greater than 2 meters. So, it should be always less than 2 meter. So, because if you are dropping from a larger height if the tendency is to have tendency is to have larger particle will have a tendency to go further away. So, dry air mixes this is this situation is more prominent and therefore, direct discharge as shoot is a better one which is nothing but will have a cross section like this a shoot will have a cross section like this shoot will have a cross section like this as we have seen earlier and it may be something of this kind you know made of mold. So, this something of this kind so, through a shoot one can discharge from discharge first to the shoot and which is on a slope you can discharge through that. So, to if the height is you know say 2 more than 2 meter or even somewhere around 2 meter. So, discharge through a short shoot is usually better long shoots are not very good they might cause sticking of the paste there and larger particle again may go away. So, this is discharge through the shoot wheel boroughs is one thing must remember the whole load from the mixer machine should go to the wheel borough we will see that there is one slide later on in do's and don't don't of concrete in case of small mixer whole load should go to the single borough. Sparlier power boroughs are use same thing and people have used dumpers are here, but today it is largely agitated truck it is better to keep on a agitated truck. What happens is in case of dumpers or trucks you see if is going over the rough road there can be jolting even if it is pneumatic tire. So, if there is some amount of jolting then what will happen this jolting results in segregation larger particle will jump up while paste will stick and then larger particle will tend to separate out from the paste because paste would have you know it is by this kind of jolting action paste and larger particle tend to separate out. So, as a result dumpers or non agitated truck are not preferred especially the road is rough agitated truck of course, manages to agitated and keep them together. So, that is using a truck monorail systems can be used over large slab you know the it can discharge on both the sides if is traveling over the slab or similar sort of system in a precast factory this might be useful elevating towers and moist they actually lift the concrete up in buildings or sometime in bridges. So, you will have to have buckets buckets through which concrete could be lifted up and then if it is also a horizontal travel then the bucket has to be unloaded somewhere may be onto a barrow or something so that horizontally concrete can be moved horizontally. So, elevating towers and moist moves transport the concrete only along particle direction you need something else for horizontal movement right monorail of course, also can have little bit of slope but usually it is slab or flat surfaces in in cast you know precast precast situations this could this is have been it has found is used. If operated by cranes or overhead cableways buckets essentially operated by cranes. So, crane has got both horizontal as well as vertical movement over a particular radius it can deliver concrete both horizontally as well as somewhat vertically but does a limitation depending upon of course, the type of cranes is tower crane then it can actually transport quite a bit both horizontally as well as vertically. Over at cableways have been used in river well if projects you know to transport concrete from one bank to the other bank or over the somewhere over the river itself. So, these are but you need again buckets and can transport through the using the bucket buckets can be transported. Belt conveyors or boom conveyors boom conveyors are actually used along with a tower crane so concrete can be lifted up through hoist or towers and discharge into a container in a boom or in a boom conveyor through the conveyor concrete can be transported at different places and the boom conveyor can actually rotate and move and therefore, over a circular area it can spread the concrete. Belt conveyors are also used from point to point actually but one thing in both these cases over the rollers of the belt, belt moves over the roller and as it moves over the roller there can be jolting action because it you know it actually it would actually belt moves like this over roller belt moves over rollers you know belt moves over rollers something like this something like this then there is another so as the concrete and there are concrete here concrete as this is the section as seen from this direction you know so these are your concrete it moves. So, as it moves over this roller there can be some jolting so and this can result in segregation besides the slope is restricted you can only it can transport the concrete through slopes of about 15 degree maximum 20 degree or something of that cannot very stiff slope it cannot transport concrete. So, this is you know conveyor belt switch have been also used in some cases it is still used actually if in you know for example, if you are making the lining of a steel pipe usually pipe switch carry water steel pipes there is an inside mortar lining or reach cement mortar lining or it cement paste lining. Now, what is done is the belt conveyor takes the concrete right inside the pipe inside the pipe you know it is like this this is your pipe cross section the belt conveyor this is your pipe steel pipe right belt conveyor will move the concrete here and discharge from the concrete will be discharged from here right away onto this one and this spins this of course, spins rotates and by this rotation it transports the concrete or puts the concrete right up anywhere and this through this process actually or cement paste not really concrete cement I mean mortar reach cement mortar this would be this would actually be get spread it now the this conveyor can move inside right inside and then gradually shifted and through this belt conveyor concrete case transported. So, pipe lining one can use this conveyors many other places over short distance not much slope belt conveyors can be used but they are very specific not very common we are doing it, but they are also a method you know this is also a method. Egetator tracks and track mix are I have already talked about creamy is used in underwater concrete you will have some diagrams and look at that. Pumps and pneumatic places this is the most commonly used and will they devote a complete you know separate lecture on this particular one and you can use any combination of the above because if it is to be for example, in earlier days let us say you have a high level bridge. So, the bridge deck you know something like you have a bridge deck you want to do some casting. So, you have something like this is your pier and there is a pier head pier head and you know pier head is here and bridge spence along this direction it spence along this direction right it spence along this direction it spence along this direction all right. So, this is something like this the guard or system box guard or maybe. So, what you do is over the pier head actually there is a center point you have to leave the concrete and transport say if I see it like this this is this would be my if I see it like this this would be my this would be my deck system right on this side right on this side and I have a tower here. So, I leave the concrete through the tower transport it along this direction if I am to cast some segment here let us say I am casting some segment here. So, I need two methods combination that is a tower through which I will leave the concrete here and there is a wheelbarrow or some sort of transport horizontal transport to take the concrete at this point. So, this is in case of bridge and there is very common building to. So, you may have to actually use combinations. So, combinations are used any combinations depending upon the situations. So, any combination depending upon the situation one may use right let us see some of them in more details something to do the manual transport free fall of concrete over a height of 2 meter is to be over and that is what I said it cannot drop concrete more than 2 meter short shoot with proper lower end treatment are simple to use and economical short shoot can be used wherever required and that is you know it can actually last for large number of repetitions steel shoots metal shoots is a semicircular cross section simple semicircular cross section apart you know you can half cut pipe if you have a pipe you just cut it half something of that kind, but it is not usually pipe it is a metallic bend. So, something of that kind metal steel bend shoots can be used and they are very useful because of a short distance supposing you have a trench or you have the foundation you know of which is slightly below the ground footing you want to cast and you want to drop the concrete from the top. Now, if you drop it you do not drop it more than 2 meters because relatively dry concrete should have a 10 coarse aggregate in relatively dry concrete would have a tendency to go further away while paste will have a tendency to remain. So, it causes a kind of segregation, but short shoot if it is dropped on to the short shoot it goes down through the general slope the actually the larger particle will still be sticking to the paste and so on so forth. So, short shoot is fine long shoot there can be a problem because some paste will be in the long run it will tend to go dry and at the end it may actually cause the paste to remain stick sticking you know very long shoot should not be preferred. Manual concrete in therefore, you know this 2 meter height one should give this for example, this is what about the shoot it is metallic half round in section. Steep and that places may last to handle about 1500 meter cube of concrete. So, shoots one almost is a must even if you have all other mechanism of transporting concrete some should sometime you may have to use a shoot somewhere in the concrete long shoots along desirable. So, this is one major issue one must look into all right then buckets and keeps these are most important well 2 types of buckets have been actually used or proposed but this is not very common one is roll over other is constant altitude type they are actually designed bucket there are other kind of buckets which are used they are not the best one. But instead you know I did not discuss much about the monorail nor about the cable ways and all that, but I choose to discuss buckets of skips because they are used quite often most commonly used and you have to combine them together with your tower or anything else you know many places you have to combine the buckets and skip even if you are using a crane you have to use a bucket and bucket if you are using any kind of transportation method you have to use a bucket. So, there are 2 types of buckets one can think about one is called a roll over bucket other is the you know constant altitude type of bucket these are absolutely designed bucket for concrete transporting and placing. The capacity of course, can have 0.2 meter cube 2 as large as 10 meter cube now 10 meter cube 2 handle it accordingly 0.2 meter cube is a small one and they would look something like this ok as we will see later on control of discharge is obtained from good design in terms of shape of the gate for proper flow the ease of feeling should be there and resistance to wear and tear are other aspects of good design. So, essentially discharge you know control discharge discharge control is very important gate shape should be very important and it should have proper flow by while feeling it should be very easy to feel and it should last for long period of time right buckets are also used for under water concluding will come to that sometime later. So, the 2 types of buckets I was talking about this one this one is a roll over you know it is actually a roll over right and what it does is while lifting it is like this. So, this is the position while lifting right where is a position while lifting while loading it is position is something like this. So, this is the this is the one it is get lifted. So, you actually load it through this is actually load it through this and concrete get loaded here. So, it gets loaded there this mechanism is essentially meant for lifting it up. So, bucket shape is something like this and then as it is filled in this is lifted like this. So, discharge is from this bottom discharge is from the bottom opening you just make it to open and this is the discharge is from bottom opening. So, this is roll over type 1 can use them. So, it can roll over this is constant height. So, this height is constant this can go down a little bit, but this is the height of the bucket this actually the height and when it is lifted you can you know this can come down this is the lifting this is the lifting mechanism this simply for lifting right this height and this is the bucket get supported on this frame bucket is supported on this one this is actually the bucket the concrete inside the black portion is a concrete. So, concrete is inside. So, while lifting you know this while in position while loading loading is from the top the bucket is in this position it is simply supported on this frame and while lifting even simply lift from this position. Now, you can see that it is wide open this has to be wide open here also this has to be wide open. So, buckets main thing is this is two kinds of design actually, but there can be various other kind of design possible essential requirement is this should be wide open as open as possible and should not be very narrow and not in one corner because if it is wide open and bottom opening type that is much better. So, this can be opened by let us say first you close it then load it and when it reaches the concrete reaches simply the gate here can be open gate here can be open it might be hooked or some sort of mechanism. Now, conventional sometime we people who use this kind of buckets large cylindrical bucket with a hook and you know just tilt it to discharge tilt to discharge that means, it will take a shape of it will take a shape like this while discharging you know and manually discharge take a shape like this. So, while it is in some position here because it is being tilted because it is being tilted large size aggregate will be a tendency to go this is not the best way to do. So, discharging from the top is not desirable not desirable not desirable discharging from the top is not desirable tilting this one tilting this one and actually discharging the concrete is not desirable it should be bottom it should always be bottom it should discharge should always be from the bottom because if you try to tilt and discharge large aggregate if the concrete is a little bit dry not pumpable or self compacting concrete that concrete of course, does not require all this. But slightly dryer concrete would if you are trying to tilt it the large size aggregate will have a tendency to go further away. So, large size you know large aggregate large aggregate smaller aggregate and smaller mortar aggregate and mortar would have a tendency to remain close because you are tilting. So, large particle will go away space to it and you will find there is a segregation at the point of discharging. So, this is been used quite often sometime these are used but that is not the best thing to this is not the best thing to do one should be using bottom bottom opening bucket one should be using bottom opening bucket and large opening for example, this this photograph shows a bucket here. So, this is the bucket but this is not a very good bucket you see is inclined although the opening is opening is here the opening is here is actually a foreclift which has lifted it up and it is being concrete is being transported using foreclift it will be discharging somewhere ahead right. So, foreclift turns out there is not the best thing to do. So, this bucket actually well so, on to the ground it is supported like this is simply supports here, but this inclined discharge is not the best thing to do and this should be narrow. So, while inclination in the discharge actually paste to have a tendency to you know block here, clock here and that is not the best thing that is not the best way to actually discharge concrete. It should be bottom open wide open bucket bottom open wide open bucket for example, this one is discharging somewhere there it was it is you know it is actually discharging concrete somewhere into this mold this mold and this is not the best bucket as possible. Discharge is through this particular end and this not you know this position and it is not the best thing to do it should be bottom open it should be bottom open preferably and with a wide opening with a wide opening you know. So, that and the gate can be closed and opened easily and smoothly most of the concrete should discharge. So, this was related to this was related to buckets. So, important point is that a point is using bucket and which are very commonly used you know means of transporting concrete one should be careful because segregation is the major issue. So, while transporting concrete it one has to be very careful segregation is the major issue as I said you know if the bottom is narrow nothing will pass through it possibly only paste will go aggregate will go much later. So, narrow opening should not be there large opening and bottom opening large opening bottom opening should not be till 10 because tillting can result in segregation. So, you will have to remix it again etcetera. So, this is very important now one important place you would like to look into while transporting concrete under water under water placing of concrete poses actually a number of problems you cannot compact the concrete and you know concrete may get mixed with water. So, whenever possible under water concrete you know under water concrete should be about it is not connecting this should be correcting this should be concreting under water concrete should be concrete should be you know avoided. This should to be avoided actually under water concrete should be avoided this should be avoided well today you have self compacting concrete. So, you can actually go compression may not be an issue you can pump the concrete. So, that also may not be an issue but still mixing with water getting mixed with water that that is that is usually an issue and you that is usually an issue. So, there are many ways of doing it actually under virtual concreting. Concrete must be self compacting and wet enough to flow under its own weight and must be placed with least disturbances must be placed with least disturbances. One may use what is called an anti wash out admixtures, one may use what is called an anti wash out admixtures which actually thickens the concrete sort of something similar to what is called viscosity modifier. So, that would ensure that it you know does not lose much of the cement, it does not lose much of the cement. So, one of the ways of course is use prepact or grouted concrete you know trim your bucket as you shall see pumping and dumping by bags. Now, grouted concrete is prepact or grouted concrete is you know say see this well foundation we do something called bottom plugging bottom ploughing ploughing. So, well is sunk once the well has been sunk well has been sunk boulders are dumped right boulders are first dumped. So, you dump the boulder then lower the pipes simply grout pipes and they you know the actually first pipes are lowered and then the boulders are dumped about it. So, just see how it looks like it would be something like this you know you have let us say you have a well you dump is a bottom of the well let us say and you dump the boulders of different sizes dumped the boulders of different sizes up to certain height which you can be found it find out found out by you know find out found out by what is called sounding. Then pipes are already pipes are already there and the pipes are already there in the beginning pipes are already inserted there find pipes grouting pipes and they go right up. Then inject the grout through this inject the grout inject you know grout under pressure. So, grout under pressure goes in and it gets spreaded inside and then makes this grouted concrete. Now, this is what is used in bottom plug bottom or top plug of well foundation because in a river for a bridge you use a well foundation there will be water well foundation inside the well there is water. So, what is done is once the sinking of the well is over you do what is called bottom plug. So, actually make it heavy stability as well as put you know make a kind of a concrete there. So, first put down the pipes grout pipes and reach cement 1 is to 3 cement mortar you use with you know is say but then it has to flow. So, therefore, lot of water sometime one can use actually plasticizer and any other kind of a mixture actually shrinkage compensating maybe but that is not used usually one may use a plasticizer or generally simply the grout you know using a call grouting process as it is called. So, basically grouting you do so it actually plugs up the bottom then you fill in soil here soil is filled in here and then you do again what is called a top plug. So, what you do is again a top plug. So, top plug is you know top plug is done here top plug is done here actually top plug is done here you know top plug you do here. So, you do top plug again bolder dumping and same thing. So, this is the process by which actually you do under water concrete in case of well foundation and that is essentially using the kind of using the kind of use of grout that I talked about. Now, dumping by bags is also possible it is also possible to dump by bags it is also possible to use bags and dump it by bags you know it is also possible to use dump it by bags. So, what you do put the concrete inside bag and just simply dump it now then you are doing it what you are doing you are actually some place where you are just filling in concrete with the bags. So, the bags gives the concrete away from the water not you know it can be done somewhere where the shape of the things are not very important you just want to dump some bags and that is okay. Pumping can be done and nozzle of the discharge nozzle must be always below the concrete itself always below the concrete itself. Unitary concrete is very common in trenches and that is what it will look something like this. Streamy concrete is you know it will look something like this. So, let us see first the buckets and then under water buckets could be of something of this kind you know under water buckets could be something of this kind this is got a skirt it has got a skirt right a canvas cover and the skirt. So, you have a bucket which is a bottom discharge open that means it will open like this you know this is a bucket in closed position and while opening simply this will get opened like this this bottom will open like this you see this portion has opened. So, bucket is something like this bottom opening complete is lifted up like this, but there is a skirt outside. So, this card normally as you are transporting the concrete it is up. So, once this portion goes and touch the bottom like this you know at bottom the skirt actually will open up and concrete is discharged within this skirt. So, concrete is this is the open portion. So, this is concrete this is the concrete and concrete is discharged within the skirt. So, that you know it does not get mixed up with the water immediately. So, this is one way it depend upon where you are using. So, this one first this is the way they are filled and you are lowering and this is the discharge. So, bucket but more common is what is called a trimmy concrete a trimmy process. Now, in a trimmy process is actually done in trench and anywhere actually anywhere you know anywhere you can do it. So, in trenches for example, or let us say piles, castings it to piles, castings it to piles. In castings it to piles you first you drill the bore and then put bentonets slurry to stabilize the water around and then dilute the bentonet and put the trimmy pipe inside put the pipe trimmy pipe inside and discharge. Now, one thing the pipe bottom must be inside the concrete pipe bottom must be inside the concrete. Here also it is actually this pipe bottom must always be below the concrete. So, first is prepared surface to receive concrete will there can be some preparation or whatever it is and end of the trimmy is continuously below the top surface of the concrete. So, to start with actually what you do to start with a little bit of concrete you know you put the concrete actually little bit, but that concrete will be you know it forms a heap but concrete some of the concrete will actually come in contact with water. But later on you have always the trim bottom of the trimmy pipe below the concrete. So, this portion if it is discharging actually concrete will built up from here. Now, this surface is in contact with water this surface is in contact with the other. So, as a case here the top surface of the concrete is in contact with water rest of the inner concrete will never be in contact with water right. And this pipe once it is filled in let us say all once you have filled in the concrete up to this you lift it up. So, there is a you can lift it up and it is flange pipe. So, there are flanges you make connections there are segments or sections so you make connections and as you make the connections through the flange gradually you lift it up depending upon what is a you know how much of the concrete has been placed. So, lift it up and there here there is of course, a hopper through which concrete is drop through this concrete is drop, but dropping to the you know depending upon the height if you drop it from a too much of a height I mean it is you know dropping height should be through a shoot actually. So, you have a shoot through which you drop the concrete and the concrete comes down below below the surface. So, this is a hopper and gradually you can lift it up remove the hopper remove one of the segment of the pipe connect the hopper back and so on so forth. So, concrete in can concrete in can concrete in can proceed in this manner. So, this is a special case of concrete in this is a special case of concrete below the water well today of course, you can simply put the pump you know the hose of the pump and is nozzle just at this position and you are not compact compacting the concrete. So, concrete should be as flowing as possible in good old days people would make it the very high slum and also use very low water cement ratio essentially to see that because water cement ratio is you know might get disturbed. Modern days of course, water cement ratio still is an issue you can keep it low, but one can use the pump or self compacting sort of concrete or pumpable concrete which will go inside and which will actually and flow. So, that is actually related to high you know under water concrete on concrete in trade. So, we have discussed actually most of the method related to concrete transport concrete transport transporting concrete right and also before that we looked into transportation by redmiques concrete you know trucks which actually combine the mixing as well as the mixing as well as the transporting process together right and most commonly used today of course, is a combination of truck and agitator truck and pump. Now, we will discuss about pumping of concrete in our next module I mean next lecture of the same module and today of course, we have discussed all the methods of transportation transporting concrete and redmiques concrete. So, main issue while transporting or even transporting through redmiques concrete is essentially two issues one is a segregation concrete shall not segregate in any manner and other issue is related to loss of slum while transporting. So, it should not segregate because placing of concrete should be within the initial setting time of cement of course, but then the setting time of the concrete. In time of the concrete can be different than the cement as I said because I can add a retarder or some kind of plasticizer retarder combination which would actually delay the setting of the concrete itself. So, I must place it within that period of time the dormant period which you discussed right in the beginning you know the reaction dormant period during which actually cement hydration reaction play takes place it goes from the plastic state to the solid state. So, during which I should do it and then it should remain cohesive and should not lose its uniformity as far as possible no segregation. So, this is what you summarize today transporting concrete we looked into all main mainly you looked into the names of the methods some we discussed in details and followed from this we will be discussing about pumping in our next lecture. So, thank you very much. === Lecture 19 Transcript === Lecture 2 of module 5. We looked into a transportation of concrete bearing one technique that is pumping. You know, pumping we just mentioned there, pumping of concrete. Pumping is more versatile than most of the methods because it can pump horizontally as well as vertically. But when I am looking at pumping, I should also look at pumpability and which is linked to workability which we have not discussed so far. So, we will discuss about workability particularly the empirical measures of workability in this lecture followed by pumping. So, we will talk about empirical tests and then relate we will talk about pumping. So, let us look at what is workability of fresh concrete. One definition is the amount of useful internal work necessary to produce full compaction. You know, it should be workable that means I should be able to make as we discussed earlier. We said that relatively not self compacting type, relatively less flowing concrete. Normal concrete as we have been using over years together. Initially, when you put the concrete in it forms a heap like the soil does and you have got an angle of repose. So, particles are supported by other particles and it forms a heap sort of, may be more flowing than soil, but it forms a kind of heap and there is as much as 30 percent voids and this 30 percent voids we drive off by compaction usually through vibration. You know engineered compaction will be through vibration. Of course, the extreme case where you do not need vibration is a self compacting concrete which I mentioned earlier. So, therefore, the workability is defined as the amount of useful work required to produce full compaction. And we also said that it does not confirm, seldom confirms to the shape of the mold. Therefore, you know there is some amount of mobility is also involved. So, workability is the useful internal work necessary to produce full compaction. The useful internal work is the property of the concrete alone. Although some amount of energy, although some amount of energy might be spent in you know in overcoming the friction of concrete and formwork etcetera, etcetera or river and so on. So, this is what we define workability as and it has then three components because what we are doing? We are it is it would be in a heap, it has to move and we have to drive out the air. At the same time it must maintain its cohesion. In other words, you know relative material should not get separated from each other. So, the three components you know three components can be written as compactability that is we should be driving out the air and the work done is to drive out the air would involve some amount of movement and flow. So, if you recall the rheology of concrete which you talked about we talked about ill shear stress and beyond which I have some viscosity and therefore, you know the stress at any point will be given by this ill shear stress this is your ill shear stress ill shear stress ill shear stress plus coefficient of viscosity and a normal force which will be a function of normal force which will be a function of normal force. So, stress like shear like soil if you do box shear stress box shear as test we would see that the amount of you know stress strain curve is a function of the normal stress that we apply the shear stress stress it can resist and mu is a kind of coefficient of friction or viscosity dynamic you know its plastic viscosity. So, stress could be this and this is a strain shear so half shear stress into strain we know the strain energy that is the kind of work done. So, you know that is the kind of strain energy that the material will absorb so that is the amount of work done. So, compactability is a function of the work done which is half stress into strain and stress is ill shear stress plus the viscosity and if you have applied any normal stress will come to this sometime in the next lecture when you talk of compaction a little bit more and this is a strain. So, therefore, this is a function of the work done which is given as the strain energy which is half shear stress multiplied by the strain half shear stress multiplied by the strain right. So, that is it this is compactability so this is how easily you can compact. So, this energy required to actually cause some movement or some shear stresses shear strain and that results in compaction. Mobility is a flow so I should be able to drive out the air and that is compactability and if I want to drive out the air there should be shear you know the shear it should show a Bingham kind of behavior I should cross the ill shear stress and then it flows and then occupies most of the volume so that you know occupies the volume and air moves out. So, therefore, that is related to work done the mobility is a function of it is the flow it is a flow because we said it does not confirm to the mold therefore, there has to be some amount of movement to attain the shape and this mobility is a function of mu again mu is a viscosity tau 0 is again in shear stress and of course, it is a function of the maximum size of the aggregate maximum m s a because larger one will easily move the smaller one moves less. So, workability actually has got so far we have seen two components I said I should be able to compact it very easily and it should attain the shape and lastly the particle should not separate out from each other and that is basically a kind of stability or function of the tensile strength of the fresh concrete. So, compactability mobility and stability this three ensures that it will not segregate it will remain same cohesive as it was and then it will move to the move and you know it will be mobile to get attain the shape of the shape of the mold and I should be able to drive out. So, the least work required would give me better worthability least an RGI required. So, internal work required should be least and therefore, work required should be least so, easily flowable one it should be more flowable and that is what it is. Now, these are the concept of workability. Now, if you see if I want to fund from fundamental principle if I want to come to compactability mobility stability and generator kinds of workability function that would be fairly complicated because I need tau 0 I need mu sigma and that too as a function of mixed parameters concrete mixed parameters such as cement content water content water cement ratio etcetera etcetera you know all those I mean water content paste content and so, many so, many factors could be there. So, from fundamentals to relate to those factors particularly mixed proportion that is content you know water content cement content aggregate content coarse aggregate content MSA maximum size of aggregate and any other mixture content and so, and so forth. Relate this to tau 0 mu is not yet we have not arrived at that kind of understanding till today as far as concrete science is concerned. So, we have and enough but then we need some measure for workability and that is you know we needed it for last 30 40 years or 50 years or nearly you know nearly 100 years for which concrete is being used. So, therefore, some empirical tests were developed some empirical test were developed for comparing the workability of different concrete. Now, to both you know there are number of test actually developed and each test measures a thing it does not measure all three components all right it does not measure all three components. So, relative comparison of different mixes as far as their workability is concerned that is possible, but absolute in from fundamental principles we are yet to arrive at that understanding. So, therefore, we rely on some empirical test all right empirical test although some work has been done in 1950 onwards and even currently the lot of work done on biology particular relate to flowing concrete. However, for normal concrete we need some empirical measures and this measures are like slum BB compaction factor test which are more popular there are number series of other tests and yield stress and plastic viscosity will be rheological test actually at the moment we are not looking at them and near content pumpability density some are specific test related to fresh concrete we are not interested, but today we are interested more in slum BB and compaction factor test which are very common empirical test which I use. In fact, this is most common this is most common this is used for drier concrete and this can be used for some concrete which are in between, but this for example, fiber reinforced concrete want to prefer this test because where workability is very low or roller compacted concrete which is actually compacted by road rollers you know art moving machinery there we do BB test with some modification put a surcharge on top because it is zero slum, there practically no slum we will get it. So, we will come to those test and this values of let us a slum or BB time or compaction factor value this depends upon the section dimension amount of reinforcement etcetera, etcetera how much is required that will you know. So, most of the normal strength concrete one would specify the slum sometime of course, BB a few of the you know practices might even include compaction factor. There are some other tests, but we are not interested this three are the most common test. So, let us see what this test is sir for example, slum test it was actually device by D a Abram is Abram slum cone and it is is very simple you place the concrete pack the concrete pack the concrete here in a cone which is dimensions are given 200 and 100. So, 2 is 2 you know 1 is 2 is 2 1 is this and this is 300. So, the second truncated cone and you pack the concrete in three layers compacted it in a standard manner lift this up the cone up now concrete certain some kind of a shape like this after lifting up. Now, this difference is right from the top is British and European standard tells you the slum American standard take the bottom most one and one can take average. So, original height depression you know depression is what you are interested in the depression from this level from this level to how much is the depression that is called the slum that is called the slum that is called the slum right. The slump is measured using up turned cone and slum rod as a guide. So, this is the rod you put it and say as a guide and so, therefore, this is the slum. So, we can understand that if the concrete is flowing then slump will be very high every stiff slum will be very low. So, you can in fact classify this is true slump something like shear slump this you know is just simply sheared off and collapse slump which is actually flat normally higher higher the slump flowing concrete will show this kind of a collapse behavior most of the ordinary concrete you know of the good old days normal concrete would show this kind of true slump. So, this is one test. Compaction factors are the test where you have a hopper in which you feel the concrete in three layers there is a gate here which you can open. So, you open it the concrete just goes there it is closed now. So, there is a kind of standard compaction you have achieved here by a drop you know drop from upper hopper to the lower hopper. So, this is about a meter height. So, there is a standard compaction you have achieved. So, that you know if somebody might pack it in a different manner it may depend from individual person to person. So, there is a standard there is a drop through this drop you have got a standard some compaction you have achieved and which is which will be more or less similar by you know it will be it will not be as much as independent individual dependent had this been not there. Then you drop the concrete into a cylinder standard cylinder which is 150 mm diah by 300 mm height and it will you know excess concrete you travel it off from here. So, excess concrete travel it off and find out the mass of the concrete. So, find out the mass of the concrete find out the mass of the concrete. So, mass of the concrete mass of the concrete as difference as difference of cylinder plus concrete minus w cylinder. So, you find out you know different this is a mass of the concrete. Now, the volume is known or next what you can do you can take this cylinder put in more concrete and then compact it in a standard manner. So, compact it in a standard manner let us say you know and then you will get this after drop drop. So, this is let us say let this one is w 1 and then similarly you compact it in a standard manner fill it in and compact it in a standard manner on a vibrating table and then you get w 2 is equals to w cylinder plus concrete vibration right minus w cylinder. So, w 2 divided you know w 1 divided by w 2 is we call as compaction factor w 1 divided by w 2 we call as compaction factor. So, therefore, what we are doing we are actually measuring concrete you know trying to find out by this standard drop the compaction of the concrete or the mass we attain by compaction divided by. So, it is the ratio of the mass we attain by dropping it through you know kind of a standardized compaction divided by full compaction under vibration in a vibrating table this ratio we call as compaction factor. So, I have this value the ease of you know it is easier to do the like the it is more workable the concrete is for example, if it is water it will be simply water 1 if it is a flowing concrete it will be simply 1 it will be simply 1. So, how easily it can gets compacted that is what it is how it is easily you know it drives out the air that is what is seen. So, it is a in fact, a function of compactability while slump is a actually settlement under itself weight. So, depend a little bit on flow properties little bit on flow properties you know under self weight how much it settles. So, so basically will depend upon actually angle of repose also it will depend upon angle of repose also as stiff concrete will have high angle of repose while flowing concrete will also somewhat related to flow, but this can be related to actually compactability. So, compacted compaction factor mostly maximum can be 1, but it is never 1 it is more than about 0.6566 or 0.7 you know 2 about 0.85 or 0.9. So, compaction factor is like that compaction factor is like that. So, this is another empirical measures it is a more suitable for laboratory situation not field application of course, not very easy B B test is the other test where it is actually a variation of remolding test. So, originally what was thought done was you have the slump cone the concrete and then remove the slump cone concrete might at an a shape like this might at an a shape like this right because there will be some slat settlement and then you put a piston here in this case of course, clear prospect this disk piston sort of a thing it is a disk basically and from this now you this can be some weight here and you vibrate it then it attains the cylindrical shape. So, 300 mm cylindrical shape you know this cylindrical shape. So, as soon as cylindrical shape is obtained the one can put off the stopwatch you start the start the vibration in a standard manner and as soon as it attains cylindrical shape from this truncated cone shape or slump trunc you know from a truncated cone shape then to this time is measured this is called B B time. Originally remolding test was done to find out the effort required to change from this shape to this shape. So, truncated cone shape to you know so original remolding test it is called remolding test. So, effort required for remolding remolding test originally remolding test. So, the effort required to remold it from this truncated shape to a cylindrical shape that is called you know remolding test, but now of course, it is measured in terms of time. So, and we call it B B time. So, this actually higher the time more effort you require. So, less workable the concrete is less of the time least effort you require. So, therefore, B B test is related to this now it is good for stiff concrete because stiff concrete will take longer time to obtain that shape. Whereas, the flowing concrete will quickly attain the shape and therefore, it may not be easy to measure it. So, this is B B test this is B B test and it is gives you and kind of a kind of a measure of moldability because you are doing a remolding test. So, the time required from remolding from a given shape of truncated to slumbed truncated cone shape to a cylindrical shape how much time does it requires. So, therefore, time required for remolding with a constant effort. So, it is actually moldability molding to a new shape that is what it talks about and relate somewhat to mobility, relate somewhat to mobility. Stability is the tensile is related to tensile strength of the fresh concrete right. Stability is related so it should not separate out. All right if we compare this three tests we will see that here is a compaction factor on this side is a V B time and here is a slum. So, compaction factor varying from about 0.6 to 1 and this side is a slum. So, you know when it is very close to it is going towards near to 1 very high compaction factor means slump is also very high. But the sensitivity of the compaction factor to lower V B time you know. So, this is I mean the V B time is less V B time here lower V B time it is not very sensitive. If you look from between slump and the V B time slump higher slump you have very less V B time. V B time is very less for high slump. So, it is not V B time is not sensitive to high slump concrete, but it is very sensitive for low slump concrete. So, when you have slump 20 you know it the V B time change will be quite significant. So, V B time is good for stiff concrete. Slump is good for relatively flowing concrete. Stiff concrete cannot handle because if you look at the slump here for the stiff or where V B time is changing the slump does not change much. So, it also depends upon aggregate cement ratio etc. Compaction factor is somewhat in between. If the compaction factor change for high slump is very little it is not changing. And here also what is stiff concrete it is not changing, but it change significantly in this zone where you have got relatively low slump and possibly relatively slow V B time as well. Relatively slow you know it actually is relatively slow you know this is a slump and the compaction factor is in between you know it is somewhere in between. Compaction factors for example, this slump 20 to 40 slump compaction factor is good or even 50 60 80 slump it is quite good, but if you go to 20 0 to 20 slump it is change is very little. So, correspondingly if you see 22 about 80 slump this zone compaction factor is still good compaction and correspond to about V B time of 2 to 4 seconds and so on so forth. So, therefore, what we find for stiff concrete V B time is good for flowing concrete slump is good compaction factor is somewhat in between. So, you can compare one with the other one with the one you know compaction factor compaction factor only cannot mix it up. So, if there is required workability is usually specified either in terms of any one of them most popular is of course, slump because of its simplicity and ease of performing the test at site ease of performing the test at site right. V B is required where you are doing very stiff concrete such I gave an example for example, fiber reinforced concrete. Interaction of fiber depending upon their L by D ratio you know this workability gets reduced because it is a kind of elongated extremely elongated aggregative are introducing. So, they actually disturbs the workability there tend to become stiff concrete now such concrete you cannot measure with slump because you will not get a slump variation, but compaction V B B time variation you will get it. Similarly, self compacting concrete there is no question of using V B time or pumpable concrete no question of using V B time not even compaction factor. So, it will be slump and similar kind of thing. So, that is how we compare that is how that is how we compare that is how we compare different test. If you see the slump you can have concrete today you can have nearly zero slump concrete to flowing concrete which is self compacting concrete right self compacting concrete. So, you there we talk in terms of slump flow for example, you just lift it up the slump cone lift it up and the spread of the concrete in measure. So, as you lift it up the concrete will get spreaded along this direction and you can see that the slump flow is measured. So, you see the extension of the slump is in this term in this you know this kind of this kind of test called slump flow. So, concrete is very versatile going from zero slump roller compacted concrete to self compacting concrete. And I also talked about mini slump earlier if you remember we talked of mini slump test in the context of a mixture compatibility or selection of admission etcetera mini slump test for paste right. So, that is that is actually you know that is essentially related to the empirical empirical methods for workability. As you can understand pumping of concrete pumping will be related largely to the slump finally, you cannot do the other one. But anyway let us see pumping of concrete issues involved first of all let us see how you know what are the pumps types a little bit and then we will go to you know pumpability of concrete itself and then mechanisms and so on so forth. Now, remember any concrete cannot be pumped pumpable concrete is somewhat different than the normal concrete because only thing that can be pumped in the you know only thing in concrete that can be pumped is water well paste also you can pump. But that is because that is water present. So, as the water moves it takes the other materials with it and but then it should not go alone leaving the solid behind. So, it should carry all the materials together with it and therefore, concrete pumping water is the one which is actually pump in pumpable and the solid should be in such a manner that there is no separation of water from the same water from the rest of it. So, therefore pumpable concrete can be just not simply you know normal concrete proportioning you might have to proportion them a little bit carefully so that pumpable it remains pumpable right. So, pumping is used both transporting and placing of concrete you can play straight away on to the mold and then it combines both vertical and horizontal transport in one therefore, it is very versatile and as I was mentioning a pump together with let us say a redmixt concrete plant truck agitator truck truck coming or the transit mixer coming and delivering your concrete and straight away into the hopper of the pump and from the pump straight away concrete goes to the mold straight away it can go to the mold. So, quite a bit of advantage can place concrete in congested site with little excess otherwise and you can place actually small or large quantities of concrete in the form continuously at a very fast rate. So, speed is also very very high. It requires use of mix having special properties suited to pumping itself that is what I was mentioning you know it is just not I mean people just simply should not be thinking that concrete with a given slump high slump is just pumpable well it is high slump is a thing but that is not necessarily the sufficient condition for pumping. So, one is to see because pipe might get choked if the concrete is not proper pipe might get choked and more frequently it might get choked because water may just flow you are leaving the material own. Pumping rates ranges up to 75 cubic meter per hour or more it will depend current pumps might do much higher and you can pump concrete to a distance of 90 to 300 meter horizontally. Maybe modern pumps might be been doing better and it can be pumped from 32 90 meter vertically but both you cannot realize together. So, either vertically up if it is you know other maximum for example, 390 meter may not be realized simultaneously you will realize it somewhat in between types of pump. Now, most commonly use pump is reciprocating time. There are other types of pumps but I have not discussed them actually and this is simply mechanically driven this is simply mechanically driven as you can see it is simply mechanically driven you have a you know reciprocating engine the piston is here right the piston is here and it is in a suction stroke. So, you have a hopper you have a hopper on which concrete comes in and you can see there is a valve the circular valve now it is open the gate is open so concrete can come in. So, it is a suction stroke and this there is another valve actually it is it will be it is closed actually nearly closed and the stroke is along this direction. So, it is a suction stroke stroking is along this direction. So, this is rotating along this direction suction stroke and as the suction occurs this gate is open concrete comes in and fills in in this space. Now, the piston goes then in the delivery stroke as this rotates here delivery stroke piston will go somewhere there and simultaneously simultaneously this valve will come and close this portion and this valve will open up you know this this concrete portion will get aligned. So, it will be something like this it will get aligned and during the delivery stroke concrete will move out of the pump. So, it is basically reciprocating action and this is directly mechanical but this system can be modified to hydraulic system and that is what is most commonly used that is what is most commonly used you know that is what is most commonly used. So, generally you will have this is this is a hydraulic system. So, this is hydraulic now the same piston is operating but it is operating hydraulically that means, your fluid you know is the one which can gives the pressure and therefore, you would not have jerks and now there are twin balls because twin twin pumps you can see one and two there are two twin pumps one and two there are twin two of them actually. So, what happens is this is a common hopper common hopper and the bulb is such the bulbs are such that while this is in suction stroke this let us say this is in suction the other will delivery. So, one of them is in suction the other one is in delivery and this is a hopper for collection of concrete hopper for collection of concrete. So, one one twin pump twin pump one in suction other delivery normally what will happen since is reciprocating pump if I plot the pressure for a single pump pressure will be like this delivery stroke in the pipe pressure in the pipe will be like this then this is a suction stroke there will be no pressure no delivery delivery side there will be no delivery then it will be something this will be another one. So, it is this pressure at the pipe pressure with time time this side is time pressure with time. So, if I have only one pump this will be the kind of half-fractified wave. But, if I have two pumps like this twin pump then I will have pressure in the delivery pressure in the delivery pipe in the delivery pipe you know the pressure will be like this. So, concrete flow will be now a full wave rectification actually. So, you will have something like this. So, twin pumps are what is most commonly used and they are usually hydraulically driven they are hydraulically driven they are usually hydraulically driven so that you have better control the smooth slow the so that you know so that it is all smooth there is no sudden change. So, actually the wave sort of half wave rectification or full wave rectification will be achieved with twin pump and thus the delivery through which concrete will be actually delivered alright right. There are other kind of pumps which you will not look into like polystatic pumps which I think I will have to we will have to skip because time constraints that we have but there are other kind of times such as peristatic pumps which are actually used in many laboratories you might have seen in environmental laboratories. So, squeeze-grid pump for peristatic pumps were used sometime small pumps. But, most commonly used is the hydraulically driven twin pump you know same reciprocating type as I just showed and they can be mobile boom pump for example, just like this if you see this is on a truck it is on a truck it is on a truck this is actually supported or the rigs right and this is a boom and you can actually you can actually deliver anywhere you like you know. So, it is a mobile boom pump this truck mounted on a truck and can be transported transported the truck can come and you can just you know the same pump is just simply on a so the it is on a mobile boom. So, you actually can deliver wherever it you know wherever is required. So, that is a mobile boom pump same one then you have got trailer mounted pump. So, for example, this is a trailer mounted pump you know pump. So, something like this this is how it looks like trailer mounted mounted on the trailer on one side. So, this will be actually towed by tow a by other vehicle mounted on trailer right and you can see from the other direction. So, this is the this is the form essentially meant for you know towing it off and the pump is mounted there. So, you can have trailer mounted pump trailer mounted pump or you can have pump which are truck mounted and both are mobile. So, you can use them in conjunction with RMC you can use them in conjunction with RMC very easily you can use them in RMC in conjunction with RMC very easily. So, that is so far as the pumps are concerned pump performance is well is for a 100 mm pipe output per hour is a function of pumping pressure and this will depend upon what is the length you are pumping through. So, 200 meter length the pressure required will be this much for 25 may pressure required is less. So, as the length increases length of pumping increases pressure required will be high and it is also function of higher the output pressure required is high. So, this is one can understand pump performance from. So, therefore, the you know the pump that you select will be based on what is the length one would like to pump and what is the kind of output. So, based on this pump capacity is actually selected. Then just go I will come to the concrete a little bit later on but pneumatic places are used in some cases where actually it is the air you know it is the air actually air which compress air which will be actually driving out the concrete. So, this is your pneumatic place. So, you can see a is the casing this a is the casing this is the casing b is the inlet hopper. So, b is the inlet hopper this is the inlet hopper through which it comes c is the bell shaped in inlet through which actually your mortar or concrete etcetera will come and d is the air entry d is the air entry you know this this one is through the compressed air would enter compressed air would enter d is the air entry and e is there is a nozzle through which also air air will enter d is a compressed air will enter through this nozzle and f is the delivery pipe. So, your concrete enters from here air under pressure and then it goes this to move. So, dry relatively dry air makes quite often guaniting for example, or similar sort of usage you can actually one can use compressed air to drive the transport the cement mortar or even you know concrete or grout or similar sort of situation not you know concrete dry relatively d I not grout really relatively dry. But even grouts can be pneumatically placed to concrete this pneumatically placed to a pneumatically placed. So, this is not a this is not a very common thing not in special cases of use. So, let us look at pumping and concrete flow. Now, we said that flows in form of a plug that we have seen when we are talking about when we are talking about rheology of concrete. So, it forms flows in form of a plug and we shall see a diagram course and there should be no relative velocity between aggregate particles especially when your pipe is straight and you have constant cross section. So, for constant straight pipe and constant cross section there should be no relative velocity between aggregate particles otherwise there will be segregation and concrete actually flows like plug. So, and the lubricating layer is there at the boundary. So, in other words if you remember what we talked about what we talked about you know the velocity profile it will look like this. There will be no velocity at the boundary there is some velocity profile because there is a lubricating layer, but velocity profile. So, this is actually velocity velocity v you know along the cross section v p along this direction h or cross section diameter you know diameter. So, this is radius r r and this is r. So, little bit of velocity gradient at the boundary, but there will be no velocity here. So, it actually sorry it is like this actually it will be like this constant, more or less constant this has to be constant, but there is a lubricating layer there we will just have a look at that in a minute time. So, basically lubricating layer and you should have no velocity gradient. So, lubricating layer the path boundary is essential for probability and that is important. So, compaction effect of pressure consolidated forces grow out. Now, I said that it will be like this. So, there is a compaction you know the concrete gets compressed from both the sides, concrete gets compressed because it is moving the piston is causing it to move. So, piston causes it to compress, piston causes it to compress. So, when it compresses when it compresses the water will force out. So, ground comes out in fact, ground will compression, ground will force out. So, ground goes upward, ground forces out. So, compacting effect of pressure consolidates and forces out grow. So, material will come closer to each other you know solid materials and some ground will be forced out to the periphery. So, this is one action, this is one action, this is one action. Next thing is traveling action. So, when you travel a concrete you know if you have seen that in we would travel a concrete, this is your concrete let us say and you do traveling you do some sort of traveling you know just polish it. So, what happens traveling actually brings out when you are water. Now, traveling effect occurs here between the pipe boundary and the ground you know and the concrete itself. So, as it is moving as the relative motion you know pipe boundary is fixed, pipe is fixed, the material is moving, material is moving. So, as it moves there is a kind of traveling effect in the boundary, this frictional drag due to the frictional drag and that also pulls out the ground. So, this ground goes to the boundary, the compaction also compacting effect of pressure also causes ground to move to the boundary of the pipe. So, the pipe boundary if you have sufficient material you know grout is available in the system they will go out to the pipe boundary, they will go to the end of the pipe boundary and creates that lubricating layer and create that lubricating layer create that lubricating layer right. So, it will create those lubricating layer and that is what it is. So, velocity, velocity here there is a reduction but in this zone it is all constant. So, velocity is constant in this zone this remains fixed concrete, this is this is actually this is actually the friction layer, the lubricating layer you know the lubricating layer will be here this is a pipe boundary. So, pipe boundary, pipe thickness then the lubricating layer and then the plug that will be there. So, flow is plug flow the flow is plug flow you know as we mentioned earlier and you remember that was in the Bingham state not 3, 4 just before 3 and 4 1 is like solid 1 to 2 like solid 2 to 3 there are some kind of 2 to 3 is the plug sort of thing and 3 to 4 was actually flowing like a liquid. So, here actually it should be best it would be between 2 to 3 that means, the starts moving you have a lubricating layer at the boundary but the velocity relative velocity between the particles in the within the plug is nearly 0. When we have sufficient mortar and which has got enough water and is sufficient to fill in the world. So, first of all you must have sufficient mortar in the aggregate system and the mortar must have enough water and the fines which fills in the water itself and slightly more this will create a situation where lubricating layer will form readily and this is set the concrete in that case in the context of pumpability is called saturated. In saturated concrete radial and axial pressure are same that means, pressure in this direction and in this direction is same you know there is pressure along this direction uniform pressure in both transverse radial as well as in the radial as well as in the in the horizontal or axial direction. So, they will be same same pressure same pressure all right. So, that is under saturated condition because the grout would have moved to the boundary formed a lubricating layer and it is able to move. So, radial and this pressure would be same and too much cohesiveness of course, can result in too much cohesiveness due to excess cement and fines may prevent formation of lubrication. So, I must have a minimum fines content which is which should be sufficient to fill in the words in the mortar system or sufficient paste I must have sufficient paste and slightly more than to fill in more than you know sufficiently sufficient paste which will obviously, fill in the words in the mortar sand system or aggregate system, but slightly more in fact, we need more paste with lot more fines here fine means not fine aggregates, but fine are below 300 micron or 150 micron that sufficient fines should be there. So, that my lubricating layer can form because remember lubricating layer is formed because of the fine material present in the system and cement and very fine part of the sense of fine aggregate system forms this and that should form that lubricating layer. So, I might have cement or cementitious material or some sort of inert fillers like limestone powder or you know fly ash is of course, a very good material for that purpose because it is spherical in nature and it can fill in those contribute to the paste content or drought content of the mix and thereby actually it makes the concrete more or less easily makes it saturated easily makes it saturated. Now, good old days there are no when there are no fly ash on such things people did test and they looked into say water cement ratio along this axis water to cement along this axis and the pressure pumping pressure. So, it was observed that when you have low water to cement ratio such as this your pumping pressure is very very high. So, that you know we call it as 3 you can actually divide it into 3 zones in the first zone your pumping pressure is pretty high this is actually unsaturated situation because you have got less water more of the solid in the water to cement ratio is low right in other words water to powder ratio is low that means, water is not sufficient to fill in to make the paste flowable right. So, I will not call it C today I will call it cementitious maybe C M cementitious material. So, water to cementation or powder we might call it even powder. So, water to powder ratio if it is low it may be unsaturated in other words sufficient lubricating layer may not form because of lack of route there is a transition zone which is in between transition zone which is in between where you know lubricating layer starts forming and when water to powder ratio is sufficiently high you have a saturated situation where lubricating layer readily forms and your pressure reduces down. So, it can flow at lower pressure it can flow at lower pressure it can flow at lower pressure. So, it is if you see in another diagram for example, the void content versus this side is a void and this side is a cement of course, I will call it powder here current days current days we will call it powder in good old days one would have call it cement. So, when you have got lot of voids in the system high voids in the system and very little powder content the voids will be remaining and if you are trying to pump it will actually cause segregation and choking you know it is it is high void in the system lesser powder material. So, it will actually cause segregation or if you have too much of water in the system it can even cause bleeding right it can cause bleeding. So, this zone is not very good for pumpable pumping because you do not have sufficient powder in the system it is actually the water goes out it is actually the water tries to go out and if the pore single system in the fresh concrete pore single systems are so fine that the water has a got a you know it cannot filter out. So, if it wants to go out it has to take the solid along with it right it you know it is it is sort of you know it is you know it is kind of a in reverse of a filter in a filter water goes out leaving the solids here if the water has to go it must take the solid in. So, water cannot go right. So, what should happen the pore single system must be sufficiently fine very fine and when can it happen when you have fine particles cement particles are sufficiently high and this interstitial space between those cement particle is such that water just cannot move out through them cannot squeeze out through them under the pumping pressure. This if it happens that way water will be going out leaving the powder now this can happen when you have two less particle or cement fine particle or powder system in there. So, water will go out leaving the so you know sufficient fine sufficient powder or cement fines I am talking of cement or similar sizes material if they are there the lens here that the pore within them interstitial pore within them is so fine water cannot go out they will have to take it take them together. If it is less then there can be segregation that is bleeding can occur from water may squeeze out. In between you can see that marginal but somewhere you have when you have a low voids in the system low cement it works out it is readily pumpable and is in this zone when there is you know compatible cement and the void in the system. So, the packing is such the system void in the system is sufficient and cement is also sufficient to fill in those spaces. So, there is a compatible zone in which pumping is pumping does occur readily but if you have too much of powder in the system what will happen is you know it will offer high resistance lubricating gradual form but it will offer high resistance to actually flow because of too much of cohesion in the system. So, therefore, there is a zone of pumpability in between so it has to very fine or powder material sufficient right sufficient powder material or appropriate optimal amount of powder material which is more than the normal case normal it will have more paste in fact and flowing paste but not excess water just flowing paste sufficiently flowing paste. So, that paste flows and it takes the aggregate also with it. So, water goes it must take the cement with it and the powder other powder in material with it. So, that paste moves as as a single entity and embedded aggregate also moves. So, you will have slightly higher paste content in pumpable concrete. Now, people have tried to relate this to slump and if you see in this particular diagram slump increases along this direction you know slump increases along this direction. So, slump is here more slump here and this is the pumping pressure. So, about 130 mm slump here it is 130 pumping pressure is very small pumping pressure increases verabolically depending upon of course, the aggregate size aggregate size you know aggregate size smaller size aggregate larger size aggregate etcetera etcetera. So, pumping pressure increases as the slump reduces. So, one can say that somewhere around 120 130 mm of slump you will be concrete will be pumpable. But remember slump is one thing amount of fines is also important. So, I can achieve this slump of course, with the admixture but also amount of fine small be sufficient otherwise that could be choking. So, slump is an important thing right. So, most of the time we actually define slump for pumpable concrete as 120 plus 120 plus maybe 130 140 100 in fact, IS 456 2000 also gives you the minimum slump record for pumpable concrete somewhere around 120 I do not remember exactly not really at the moment we are interested in that. But the fine constant contents if I look at cement content in good old days this I can call it as powder content powder content along this axis. So, if I increase my powder content there is an optimal point beyond this if I increase my powder too much the pumping pressure. This axis is pumping pressure pumping pressure pumping pressure so pumping pressure will increase if I increase you know it will increase and low cement or low fines pumping pressure is also high it reduces as I increase and further. So, I have an optimal quantity of the optimal quantity of the material which material the powder in material which will give me least pressure like we mentioned earlier right least pressure we mentioned earlier. So, that is it so we should have optimal fine content so pumpability one must look at the optimal fine content. Similarly, one can look at the aggregate content this will also give us since the fine content set has to be powder content has to be optimal correspondingly aggregate content is also optimal. So, you have got an optimal if you have too much of aggregate too much of aggregate less powder it will be not pumpable pressure will be high and when you have too less of aggregate system so then also again pumping pressure will be high right. And then let us look at this is related to coarse aggregate content similar sort of situation here coarse aggregate content is lower here higher on this side sorry lower on this side high high on this side. So, lower on this side actually you will find that you know it is something similar concept I think I will skip this quickly because we have something more to look into. So, if it is saturated concrete in fact the pressure at any point at distance x pressure at any distance x. Pressure at any distance x can be pressure at any distance x can be pressure at any distance x can be related to pressure at any distance x can be related to P0 is the pressure P is the pressure at distance x P0 is the delivery end D i is the particle D i is the pipe diameter and R is a flow resistance per unit area of the pipe. So, pressure at any distance from the delivery end at x distance from the delivery end one can relate like this. In other words you can find out if the p 0 is known if the pipe diameter is known and resistance flow resistance per unit area of the pipe is known which will be a function of the mix. Then one can find out what is a maximum pumping distance. So, x max will be given by simply x max you can obtain by p 0 d i by 4 R. So, one can actually get because when p is equals to 0 you can find out what is the value of x that is x max. For unsaturated concrete there is one formula like that there is one formula like that but there is more complex a little bit more complex. You have a coefficient of friction between concrete and the pipe coming in and also coming in an adhesive resistance similar to in stress radial pressure to axial pressure ratio because radial pressure to axial pressure were same mu k coming in here it was same before it was one earlier and this is the kind of formula. So, it is actually exponentially reduces right and this is the kind of formula. This a is something adhesive resistance similar to in stress. So, that is more complicated but saturated concrete is what is desirable right and this fraction you know friction or the force the the the the resistance offered is a function of the concrete type and saturated concrete will have you know as you can pump more through the saturated concrete. So, therefore, x max you can find out even in this case given by this formula di over 4 mu k l n you can simply put a p 0 equals to 0 and put p 0 p sorry p equals to 0 you will get an expression for x max given by this simple algebra there is no problem put this equals to 0. So, this is this minus this take it on to the other side take l n of both sides. So, it will become simply form mu k x by d a di and l n p 0 plus you know this. So, you can actually get an expression and this will be this will be simply l n of all of those things. So, you can actually obtain an expression for this particular one right. So, in fact, this will be separated out if you take put this equals to 0 this goes to the other side multiply by mu k. So, you can separate this out and simple algebra will give you this formula I do not think I will derive this is very simple and a one can do this pressure bleed test is the one test which is used for pump ability. Now, this equipment looks like this you have a kind of a tap here bleed tap there is a kind of a you know as you know there is a kind of a mesh here there is a kind of a mesh right a mesh here standard mesh here is a concrete and there is a piston through which you apply a standard pressure. So, apply standard pressure and the after you apply the pressure there is a mesh here which allow water to pass but no solid. So, bleeding will under this pressure bleeding will occur you measure the rate of bleeding rate of bleeding or volume that the water that is actually accumulated at 10 seconds to 140 seconds and pump ability is related to pump ability is related to this pressure bleed test in the x axis you have actually the V 140 V 140 minus V 10 that is the volume of water that comes out. So, if the water comes out you know over a longer period of time initially if it goes out first 10 seconds I mean it is 10 seconds is actually omitted out and it should come out in a slower speed. So, pump ability is readily defined depending upon slum this axis you have slum this line. So, this is the zone of pump ability readily pumpable zone where I have got sufficient value of V 140 minus 10 you know this value is high and slump is corresponding to the slum. So, both slum and pressure bleed test can be used together in order to obtain the pump ability. So, this zone is readily pumpable of course, this is not a very popular test most of the people use slump and therefore, not necessarily always high slump will ensure you pump ability. Well, just to conclude our discussion effect on pump on pumping effect on pumping concrete dry air consistency it turns to become dry. No negative effect actually increase in temperature slightly because of the friction slight increase in air content and no change in strength or shrinkage although aluminum pipes may cause loss of strength. If it is just aluminum pipe without any coating because aluminum can react with concrete you know see calcium hydroxide and all that aluminum can react actually the concrete C 3 A system aluminum heat system can react with also concrete. Lastly, some do's and don'ts with concrete to end our discussion on transportation and all. For example, this diagram shows if it is a small mixture you know you should actually load full load should be put on to the barrow full load should be put on to the barrow you know full load should be put on to the barrow unlike in this case this is not the best thing to do this is not desirable half load on to the barrow half load on another barrow this will be a stony batch this will have more paste more mortar this should be full load should be put on a barrow right because this sort of mixture machine will have a tendency to discharge larger particles in the beginning and finer particle at the end. Now, again this is not desirable I mentioned yesterday this kind of a discharge is not desirable neither this one thing is narrow and inclined it should be actually desirable is a you know direct and then through a bottom opening large bucket large bottom opening bucket large bottom opening bucket and this is not again this if you discharge stones will come here mortar will come there. So, narrow opening very little will come here stones will come here mortar will come here here the paste will have a tendency to come aggregate will remain bottom large bottom opening is always better this is not good this is not good yesterday last last lecture also I mentioned say large bottom opening is better dropping directly through a height is not desirable from a conveyor belt for example, you might drop it through kind of shoots or guides. So, this is also just we just use kind of string then our discussion which we had earlier right. So, dropping of concrete some do's and don't so, it concrete handling related to manual handling. So, I think with this we conclude our discussion on this particular lecture the third lecture of the fifth module we talked of workability we talked of empirical measures of workability then we look at pumping next lecture we look at compaction and curing thank you very much. you === Lecture 20 Transcript === Welcome to module 5 lecture 4. So far we have looked into issues of fresh concrete and of course, the production process and in the last lecture of this module we look at the two important aspect of the aspect of handling fresh concrete mainly compaction and curing of concrete. So, first we will talk about compaction, why do you need it at all? Then generally we use it vibrators so something about the vibrators themselves. Then mechanism of fresh concrete under vibration a little bit because we have discussed quite a bit of it elsewhere earlier and then we will talk about execution of vibration again briefly and lastly we will talk about curing, need and method. So, let us talk about compaction and that is you know usually do by vibration. Now I mentioned this earlier that placed concrete contains air wards up to 30 percent. You know if it is of course dry concrete not we are not talking about very highly flowing concrete or self-compacting concrete and also we said that its seldom confirms to the shape of the form. So, therefore, compaction is required to drive the entrapped air out to densify the concrete and also to increase the homogeneity and uniformity you know this is other benefits but largely to entrapped air has to be driven out and concrete must be densified so that is why we need vibration. This compaction is achieved of course by vibration that is what we mentioned earlier too. Now, concrete vibration well energy for compaction is supplied through oscillatory motion of vibration which is nearly simple harmonic motion. We can measure the frequency of such vibration in air but it is difficult to measure within concrete. So, it is more important relevant if we can measure the amplitude of this vibration. So, energy of compaction is supplied through vibration oscillatory motion of vibration and it is generated by means of rotating eccentric having a frequency and amplitude of vibration. So, it is essentially all types of vibrator actually in some kind you know is basically moving a eccentric having frequency and amplitude generates the vibration and this oscillatory motion which is generated which is simple harmonic motion causes air to dive out will look into the mechanism of course. You can determine the frequency of the vibration vibrating machine or whichever I use the equipment in air but within concrete is difficult because the effect of the damping and other things the interaction of the vibrator you know vibrator component which is you know vibrating component with the concrete is difficult to measure the frequency. Now, we have generally two types of vibrator classification internal vibrator and obviously external vibrator but internal vibrator themselves are again classified into fetides. We will not discuss all of them because it is not it is not on machines but most commonly used one of the internal vibrator is a flexible shaft type flexible shaft type other one is of course, the vibrating machine but the motor is hand help and from there power is transmitted straight away to the vibrating component. Then there are air vibrators which can also be internal vibrators but the most common type is a flexible shaft type once in a while you might see an electric motor in hand and it is the rotating part or the eccentric which actually provides vibration is just connected to the motor. The external vibrator is formed vibrator which vibrates the form and also I can have a vibrating table generally used in the battery or in precast you know while cast for precast elements for precast elements. So, you have a table which can vibrate and you put your mold and the concrete and therefore, the vibration takes place there. Formed vibrators are relatively more common but most common of course, the internal vibrator of the facts flexible shaft type. So, let us see what they are there are some surface vibrator used for floors, vibrating screens etcetera etcetera which are you know floor vibrating for floors or flat surfaces lab etcetera etcetera. Immersion or most common is the immersion type of vibrator which are called immersion vibrator or submersible poker or spark type they have flexible shaft and other one is motor in hand type. Let us see quickly how do you go look this is a three types which can be there for example, for example, you can have a bearing here flexible drive shaft which is normally a spring which can rotate spring which can rotate actually a shaft is the is a self is a spring which will be rotating connected to a motor and then there are the bearings and this is the this is the eccentric mass this is the eccentric mass. So, this is the eccentric mass or the eccentric shaft there is a bearing here bearing here and this rotates eccentrically this rotates eccentrically causing oscillatory motion circular oscillatory motion and the concrete in the surrounding will be actually subjected to this oscillatory motion of the vibrator which actually pushes the concrete somewhat and then again it is there is release. So, there is a kind of compression of the concrete and then there is a kind of rear fraction because this will be moving in simple harmonic motion. So, this is one type the second type is pendulum type where the mass is here the flexible shaft is here which is actually as I said spring is connected to the bearing but there is a rod there is again pendulum shaft. Now, this pendulum shaft is connected to the mass eccentric mass and this eccentric mass again causes oscillatory motion you know rotates and causes oscillatory motion of the oscillatory motion of the vibrating you know of the needle that is there. So, these are also co-poker vibrator, needle vibrator they have all flexible shaft and here the motor is here electric or pneumatic motor is straight away here. So, motor is here is cable or hose simply it is cable or hose if it is pneumatic then there will be air hose. So, air will compress air will come through this and here is a air will come compressed it will get compressed air eccentric is also similar this are not very common this is very common type very common is this kind this type and even this may be quite useful. So, this is how they work. So, this is how they work actually the the needle vibrator as we call it. So, this portion of the this component of the equipment this component of the equipment actually this component of the equipment is goes inside the concrete and causes oscillatory motion around in the concrete around which will be compressed and verified and so forth. So, for radially going out toward longitudinal waves as well as it might be generating other kind of waves also, but largely it will be generating longitudinal waves and maybe some transverse wave too, but causes actually you know kind of oscillatory motion spreads around over a over a circular radius of influence over a circular you know circular area having a radius of influence. So, what you do you shift from one place to the other and one place to the others and then it is you know go on vibrating the concrete as there this is flexible side subtype is the most common and its diameter can range from 20 millimeter to about 180 millimeter. So, usually vibration is generated by means of rotating eccentric as we said having frequency and amplitude of vibration and basically frequency etcetera it is available data is available. So, dimensions are from 20 to 8180. Now, we can look at this head diav this needle 20 to 40 mm where will you be using this plastic concrete thin section right this will be you will be using in plastic concrete P stands for plastic T stands for thin section and congested reinforcement. So, you have C stands for P stands for P stands for plastic P stands for thin section and C stands for congested reinforcement congested reinforcement. So, you see thin head diav 20 to 40 mm 20 mm is used in thin section for example, web of a let us say web of a box section some web thin box you know thin web about say 100 or 150 mm 100 mm 100 mm or 150 mm thick web and you have a lot of reinforcement here plus of restressing cable is passing through. So, it is a thin section now concrete has to be plastic because if it is a dry concrete you will not do this. Now, recommended frequency of course, in kilo cycles is given a standard recommended frequency in kilo cycles per minute it is given in that means, 10 to 15000 kilo cycles per minute is the recommended frequency and you can see as the diameter increases this diameter increases frequency reduces. So, this is high frequency this is lower frequency alright and average amplitude is low here average amplitude is high here. So, average amplitude is high frequency will be low average amplitude is low frequency is generally higher. So, radius of action is 8 to 15 centimeter in this one radius of action is much more. So, where you want to use where you want to where you have thin section where you have thin section plastic concrete congested reinforcement you might use this while this is you might be used in mass concrete you can see its radius of operation is quite high and compaction rate is also fairly high. So, where you have large mass concrete of course, you want to vibrate then you might use massive massive section you want to use this for example, in dam mass M stands for massive concrete. So, mass concrete in dam sieve using in between if you see 30 to 60 very common is about 66 mm somewhere around this this is very common. Stram plus than 75 mm it is suitable for that kind of concrete relatively steep not very steep this is absolutely plastic you know maybe 100 mm slump or less than it is just below pumpable concrete let us say pumpable concrete is quite flowing but pumpable concrete itself if you are compacting then it should be it should be a use you can use this also. But in thin section larger section of course, you can use this one. So, plastic concrete wall column beam you can use 30 to 60 and this range as you see it reduces here 10 to 15, 9 to 13.5 and so on so forth and average amplitude increases along this direction this becomes lower this increases along this direction this increases along this direction radius of action increases along this direction. So, this increases along this direction and compaction rate also increases along this direction. So, 80 to 150 you will be using actually mass concrete slump plus than 50 mm slump plus than 50 mm and this could be on you know basically it relatively dry or concrete one me use this. So, that is how one chooses the little vibrator. Form vibrator are external vibrators transmit transmits impulses both in plane and perpendicular to the form. So, what you do in this case you have the concrete here you know this is the concrete side of it you put the form vibrator here right and it is fixed. So, it is fixed here form vibrator here. So, as it vibrates it transmits vibratory wave both in this direction as well as this direction both in this direction and causes vibration. So, again it will be rotating eccentric. So, it causes form to vibrate right. So, both in plane and perpendicular to the form it actually transmits the vibration I deliberately didn't want to put in a figure because then I will be going too much into the equipment part of it. Now, form is vibrated and vibration is transmitted from the form to concrete. Its acceleration generally ranges from 1 g to 3 g for adequate amplitude both rotary and reciprocating types are used and can be electrically or pneumatically proven. So, basically you can have both you know rotary type rotary and reciprocating type and can be electrically or you know pneumatically operated and you can see the rpm. So, these rpm's if you can see the rpm kilo cycles per minute is 6 to 12 kilo cycle there is 3 to 6 kilo cycles per minute 6 to you know. So, if you look at the earlier one earlier cases. So, this is relatively large higher side on the higher side for the larger needles use you know the frequencies if you can go back you can go back to the previous one. So, you can see that if you remember this is if you go back to this the 10 to 15 the first smaller one was using thinner ones were using higher high frequency. So, this is somewhere in between right. So, that is what it is. So, this is formed by bitters quite often we use them in thin sections we use them in thin sections where we cannot use where we cannot use really poker vibrator or needle vibrator you know the first ones. So, where you cannot use them then we can use this or when we are using them together with this this is used. So, vibrator form vibrators are used in thin sections it is not the best thing thin form vibrators are not definitely not the not the best of the kind of vibrators because some of the energy will be lost in vibrating the form itself. So, that is not the best one. Niddle vibrator obviously does a much better job because it is an internal vibrator and go inside and come back the computer. Thirdly the vibrator will be limited up to certain depth from the form only. So, other kind of vibrator that is table vibrator vibrating table are usually used for pre-cust element or for levator is frequencies less than 6,000 rpm. You know vibrations per minute and amplitude is less than 0.12 millimeter. So, this is pre-cust element can be used for pre-cust element one can be used. Surface vibrators exert their effects at top surface and include of course, the vibrating script, band type vibrator, vibrating roller strip, vibrating plate and vibrator roller for pavement concrete. So, they have their specific use for you know specific use this surface vibrators. So, we have seen where we select the nearly vibrator of what dimension right. Now, we can look into home vibrators where do we select them where it is impractical to use internal vibrators or by by supplementing the internal vibrators. Vibrating scripts are used in thin slabs. High frequency and low amplitude vibrator generally results in more efficient compaction. So, that is what is the thin you know if the thinness of the needle vibrator actually is most effective, but its radius is also low. So, your effort in moving this is to be relatively high. How does fresh concrete behave on the vibration? Let us see. As we said prior to compaction concrete is a mass of separate particles coated with mortar held in a pile by a arching action or course of particle you know if you can recall it will be something like if you can remember it will be something like particles of different sizes and shape, hip dup together and you have you have actually mortar is in between you have mortar in between. So, you have mortar in between it is like a pile of material with mortar in between. So, the red is the mortar, black is the aggregates I have put its spherical aggregates then it not be so. So, the mortar should be somewhere there. So, it remains like a hip it is like a hip it is like a hip it is like a hip mortar held in pile by arching action or the course of particle. So, the basically there will be arching action once supports the other and one particle supports the other. Now, as you you know this should be this actor you should be it should be able to you know you should you should get you should move and get get the shape of the mold. So, what you have to do you have to see that this particle moves down or this particle moves down or you know. So, you have to see that this particle has to move down or this particle has to move where and get the shape of the mold. So, arching action of this one they actually hold the particle because one particle is touching the other. So, by friction by friction you know one particle is touching the other. So, by the friction they are just in position. So, actually they are fall the gravity fall due to gravity is restricted or obstructed by the friction between the particles. So, you have to overcome this friction and how do you overcome this friction. So, one has to overcome this friction and let us look at our next statement. The arching is result of friction between aggregate particles surface tension of cohesive forces of the cement paste. Of course, since it is a paste is in liquid or plastic state I mean it is in plastic state. Therefore, there is some surface tension and cohesive forces of the cement paste that will also held in position the particle excess of the cement paste in the hip. Now, you got to overcome this. So, the this arching actually results in a void of air of about 30 percent because you know these are the particles are. Particles are something like this and there is water as I said. So, but there will be air gap in between. So, there will be air gap in between there will be some amount of air gap. There will be some amount of air gap in between. So, this air gap air gap is about 30 percent. Your air gap is about 30 percent. So, you will have air gap somewhere in between this particular system and this air gaps are air gap and there would be about 30 percent 30 percent air gap you did exist and you got to drive this air out. So, that is the idea that is the idea of vibration. So, what happens? Bivariate impulse actually liquefy the motor portion of concrete and thus reduce the internal friction resulting in consolidation by force of gravity. Then once it is vibrated concrete you know vibrated completely the friction is reestablished and cohesion is a stroke and strength is a stroke. Now, how does it occur? So, vibratory impulse essentially causes the water or the you know water particle in the cementitious system or paste system which can vibrate more which actually moves more than the solid particles. And more the constricted the next are you know it will exact more pressure and this pressure actually overcomes the friction resulting in a kind of collapse of the system. So, the velocity of compression waves generated could be of the around 45 meter per second in the beginning of vibration and increased to 240 meter per second at the end. So, essentially liquefaction of the motor occurs that is because the water within the pore system would vibrate more or move more than the solid particles and cause an excess pressure in the system and that reduces down the friction or overcomes the friction within the particulate system. And results in you know results in a mobility or movement of the movement of the particle and also drives out the yeah. For 200 hours the velocity is this corresponds to about so, wavelength is of the order of 1 to 2 meter to about 1 to 2 meter wavelength that is of course, the waves moves water more than the solid that is what I am saying. And generates hydraulic pressure within the interstitial water pool spaces. And this pressure is maximum in most conflict constricted space and causes reduced internal friction giving the paste temporary fluid that is what I am just saying. So, this water within the constricted space because of the movement it exact pressure and that overcomes the friction. And that is why by the that is how the particle moves right that is how the particle moves. The process of liquefaction is this we understood through let us say box shear test which you done in which you normally do in soil. Now, this kind of test are also conducted in concrete long long back and one would see something of this kind. See you one would see something of this kind. For example, you have shear strain along this direction and shear stress along this direction. You have shear strain along this direction and shear stress along this direction and shear strain along this direction. Now, you apply normal pressure sigma n and tau is applied from this side and strain is measured delta divided by h this is h and delta is this distance. So, if you measure the stress versus strain you find this sort of curve. And this depends upon sigma 1 sigma 2. So, as you increase the yield shear stress actually increases. So, normal force higher normal force yield shear stress actually increases higher normal force yield shear stress increases. So, concrete people have done box shear stress and this is the kind of behavior which normally one would see. And then like soil you can actually put shear stress versus normal stress curve and this is your normal stress this is the shear stress and this it can be related linearly. It can be related linearly like this. So, therefore, tau yield shear stress is a function of tau 0 at this point intercept plus mu into sigma. Since, there is a function of mu into sigma. So, you see the yield shear stress is a function of yield what is yield shear stress? That was this one that was shown here that was shown in the previous diagram is the yield shear stress yield shear stress. It increases with sigma it increases with sigma. So, sigma increases yield shear stress increases and one can linearly relate this simply linearly relate this. And this is tau 0 at 0 normal stress. And of course, you know this is a tensile strength of the whole thing normal tensile strength. So, mu is a this slope and sigma is the sigma is a normal stress. Now, mu is equals to 10 phi phi is what is angle of report. So, mu is equals to 10 phi and the angle of report. This we know in soil this is what we see. So, concrete dry a concrete almost behave like soil and people have studied this. And shear stress strain relationship this was before vibration if one measures. But supposing I measure this during vibration what will happen is if I forget about the grouping portion the strain softening portion for same sigma 1 sigma 2 sigma 3 stress strain curve is something like this. But when I vibrate stress strain curve goes like this that is during vibration the stress the yield stress reduces significantly. It is stress reduces significant increase. And you know the stress strain curve becomes something like this stress strain curve becomes something like this. So, if I may look at it again this is this was the case prior to this is mu this is my mu and this is this is my mu and this is this is the you know tau y is equals to you know this sorry this is the tau y is equals to tau 0 mu sigma before the before vibration. And during vibration what happens is before vibration during vibration what happens is actually there is yield shear stress reduces significantly right yield shear stress reduces significantly. And after certain period of time you find that you know like yield shear stress actually reduces significantly tau reduces significantly depending upon of course sigma value. So, my sigma this is my sigma. So, after an increase in the sigma value you find that it behaves almost something not exactly parallel to this, but in some value like this. So, when your sigma is applied sigma normal is small is small yield shear stresses yield shear stresses for small sigma n for small for small sigma n sigma n tau y is small during vibration this during vibration. So, during vibration it behaves like this during vibration it behaves like this and up to certain sigma value up to certain sigma normal value practically there will be no yield shear stress. Now, this is actually the sigma this sigma value corresponds to actually equivalent force of vibration equivalent by force of vibration what we call is this we call this as you know we define this as agitation pressure. So, the agitation pressure if the normal stress is less than the agitation pressure which is actually the slope. If I extend this line this is during vibration. So, if I extend this line this is the normal stress that will correspond to agitation pressure. So, this is agitation pressure. So, during vibration it is like this and you can go back to this diagram again earlier diagram again. So, this is agitation pressure here. So, if your normal stress is more than the agitation pressure then only you find that yield stress starts increasing. So, the result of vibration yield stress reduces significantly, but mu of course, the slope of this one slope of this one is more than the original than the original and after vibration actually it stiffens the yield shear stresses bound back to higher some value. Once you have stopped the vibration is because the cohesiveness is a V established and that is how the behavior is. So, it would again show up you know it will show up the show up the strength part of it. Same thing is shown here during vibration before vibration and after vibration. So, this angle also increases this angle this is more or less similar angle this is more or less similar angle this angle is similar when this angle is less. So, actually your 10-5 buve sigma. So, the 10-5 actually has increased angle of reposes increased that means it has it can stand on its own more stiffer and is stiffer angle and this diagram also shows you something like this this is before vibration during vibration you start vibrating yield shear stress comes out very significantly and then you stop again it rest of the situation and that is how it is. So, basically when you vibrating yield shear stress comes out. Therefore, particle can move particle can move shear you know movement due to the shear force can occur it can move over each other or slide over each other shear flow would be occurring actually and then due to this it can the air will be driven out and it can get the right kind of shape shape of the shape of the mold itself. So, that is the mechanism of vibration that is the mechanism of so, frext concrete consolidation actually occurs in two phases. In the first stage vertical settlement of coarse aggregate takes place in a manner similar to packing of granular material and shape of the aggregate place a measure roll air boards up to 5 percent remains after this. spherical particles will actually easily roll over and therefore, you know five if the first stage itself vertical settlements becomes easier for rounded aggregate. Then you have at the end of the second stage concrete behaves like dense liquid because the air boards have been removed quite a bit and finally, air boards are removed from the surface forcing mortar to appear at the surface forcing mortar to appear at the surface. So, this is important this is important to understand or know that mortar will appear at the surface you know once the air boards moved out the mortar will appear at the surface. So, you know once once you have first phases over second phase second phase actually mortar will come out and that is also a test for the whether the vibration is complete or not. You will find that the slurry or mortar phase is coming out of the top and then you can stop vibration. One can measure the unit weight by radius density gauges and they typically look like this unit weight time of vibration. So, this is your time of vibration and unit weight. So, after sudden period of time vibration is complete in fact, somewhere here the mortar would have come out right at the top and after that you need not look into any further the vibration is over. So, what you should not do with respect to vibration you see this is the correct time this is the incorrect. So, needle vibrator should not be penetrated in an angle this is incorrect this is correct because you know they will be dragging the the concrete along this direction. So, by large it should be vertically put down it should be vertically put down and if it is on a slope surface it should be done you know from this the concrete is over there is here you places so you do from the bottom and go upward. So, it is desirable that one does vibrating right vertically downward without inclination of the needle it is not desirable to incline the needle and do it and once you push the concrete vibration like this being done here. So, that is some doves and don'ts with respect to vibration. This should not be moved using internal vibrator and which can result in segregation. That means, penetrate vertically to sufficiently embedded embedded in concrete head stationary and remove slowly say 7.5 meter per second send centimeter per second is a good velocity slow velocity, but one may not be measuring them. But, why idea is that when you are taking out the vibrator it should be taken out slowly. It should be done at regular spacing to ensure compaction of all portions with adequate overlap there should be adequate overlap. I mean typically it should be like this if this is the radius of action which is known for types of needles that we talked about. The second one needle location will be here so that there is right kind of overlap. So, this is the overlap. So, overlap should be like this overlap. So, right kind of overlap should be there. In other words if I have sections like this where I have one circle covers it or thinner section you know it covers maybe something like this. The next one should be next one should be something like this and so on. So, that overlap is here, overlap is here next one should be something like this. So, there should be sufficient overlap, sufficient overlap that is idea there should be sufficient overlap right there should be sufficient overlap that is the idea no left portion should be left blank. Minimum usually 10 seconds is necessary for complete compaction vibration time needed is given by some equation I think I am not talking about that. I am not talking about that because equations nobody is going to use it much, but we understand that at least 10 seconds if you keep it and when you see the motorers come out, motorers come out as and you know motors as come out you pick it up, pick the known middle vibrator just lift it up slowly at a very slow velocity and you can see the slurry right in the top. For of course, shorter vibrators which are first end with the form vibration time is 2 minutes, 2 30 minutes depending upon concrete and vibrator itself. So, they require longer period time more energy, screech needs of course, 2 passes and degree of vibration achieved by surface vibrator of course, one can see from the figure that is there actually is up to only certain depth only up to certain depth vibration is. So, it is about something like about you know 8 10 centimeters from the top which means at 80 mm and not really not really much after that the density reduces. So, it is only the top portion maximum can reach you know you can actually vibrate. Similarly, shorter vibrator also will not go throughout the section of the section section is thing. So, that is what it is right. Now, imperfection in vibration vibrators, honeycombing actually should be incurred in vibrations actually in imperfection due to poor vibration essentially. So, in in vibrators is not the one in vibration you can say concrete vibration honeycombing if you have not done the vibration problem, but it can have you know it will have stony and air voids can have generally happen in narrow sections and a grout. Plus can also cause this if the forms are not joined properly. Freefall low-stamp concrete is a concrete type and poor vibration can result in this. Well, blow holes or bug holes which you see normal in concrete or small holes aesthetically ugly looking excess formula if you are using you can have this kind of thing lean and low-stamp concrete you get it and of course, inadequate vibration. So, poor vibration can result in honeycombing, inadequate vibration can increase the bug holes formation. Bugs are pretty common they are not very harmful, but they look very ugly. Not a good finish. Substitutes and cracking of course, this can happen due to plastic settlement. Now, it is a bleeding concrete this can occur in concrete which is bleeding you know because which is bleeding the water comes up and the solids subsides. So, this can happen an inadequate vibration can result in this high water content is the usually the concrete cause which can do. So, in high concrete, concrete which has got high water content you might get short cracks. The cracks looks like this in fact, sometime we might be discussing over reinforcement sometime you might see just over the you know this is the concrete. In fact, if it might look something like this. So, the top concrete surface look like this there is a crack and then there is a subsidence there is a crack and so on so forth. So, you have reinforcement here this is a concrete surface this concrete. So, in the concrete surface or let me draw it just here let me just just here you know it can it can look like this this is then there is a crack then there is a crack. This usually quite often could be over reinforcement and several other situations this is my concrete. So, this is a slab large slab and similar sort of situation you might see some plastic settlement cracks just over the rebar just over the rebar you know just over the rebar you might you might you might see them just over the reinforcement bar. So, this is plastic settlement crack it comes when your water is too high plastic settlement crack plastic settlement for high water content and inadequate vibration. So, where you have high water content if you have done inadequate vibration you might still get this still you might get this in fact, I mean inadequate vibration is also a cause not the primary cause, but it is also a cause you can see. Form of set of course, it has nothing to do with vibrations. So, I am not just you know if your form is I have not been bolted properly this can results in defects cold joint formation that is also inadequate vibration of the lower lower level you know cold joint occurs when you have to one concrete old concrete old concrete and then you have new concrete which is over here new concrete. So, there can be cold joint formation and this is inadequately vibration vibrated you might have cracks coming in or cold cold weak joint forming here if it is not vibrated properly. So, that is it there is a defects which can come for vibrations imperfections that can come from vibrations special vibrations are vacuum vibrations re vibration can be done as long as running internal vibrator sink. So, if your internal vibrator if it sinks into the concrete and penetration resistance of around 3.5 MP now penetration resistance is a measure of setting penetration resistance is a measure of setting and it should be 3.5 MP if it is more than that then you cannot can increase strength bond impermeability reduce shrinkage and shrink. So, the vibrations are not desirable but you can do it if it is to be done you can do it as long as the concrete is not set and is measured by penetration resistance. Vacuum vibration is accomplished by applying vacuum to surface of fresh concrete cement paste is densified by removal of air from the surface and water from the certain depth. Now, this is applied where you you know become dewatered concrete flow rings vibration resistance high abrasion resistance like warehouse flow ring or industrial flow ring. So, this is done where you are likely to have lot of abrasion basically water is removed this water is used for placing the concrete but it is removed. So, water cement ratio is low and you get really strong concrete. So, placing concrete with higher water content by extracting extra water then you extract the extra water. So, in strength is improved commonly used for slabs walls where come between 30 to 50 centimeter of mercury applied by means of special you know liners of material which you allow water to come out but the solid will keep. So, you have a mat placed on top of the concrete and then water is evacuated out you know it is through the vacuum water is taken out. It should be applied as RDS possible penetration of vacuum is up to about 30 centimeter is less efficient in air and trend concrete because then air will come out. Fresh mix subjected to high frequency vibration over 100 hertz is called bivro activation increases the strength by intensifying hydration generally does not have anything to do with compaction. So, if you have use high frequency vibration then hydration processing does not not nothing to the compaction right. So, this is a special cases. Now, let us look at the second part of our discussion that is curing you know hydration reaction is not instantaneous it is not like an explosion reaction which is instantaneous. So, it occurs over a long period of time and therefore, water must be available for hydration. Now, for hydration to continue you need a relative humidity of 100 percent. Besides there will loss of water by evaporation and it shall be prevented and if you cannot prevent it it should be replenished you know you may not be able to prevent it so, it should be replenished. Then somewhat water will be consumed by the chemical reaction itself. So, what we call is self-desiccation and this also go to performance. So, essentially what happens is reaction requires longer period of time and occurs at only 100 percent average. So, you must maintain 100 percent average water by evaporation loss of evaporation will also water by evaporation occurs and that has to be replenished to maintain 100 percent average and self-desiccation also would cause some water loss and that should be also returned and also sometime maintain conducive temperature. So, this is the purpose why you need curing you know need for curing. Well, most important is if you do not do this if you have inadequate hydration occurring the capillary pores in the system which we have discussed earlier if you if you can recollect we have discussed earlier sometime you know cement between cement hydrates, outer product etcetera etcetera and you will have unhydrated cement system unhydrated cement is somewhere there then there will be capillary pores interconnected capillary pores in between you know you have capillary pores. So, this capillary pores which you have discussed earlier then it to be segmented. Now, only when you have sufficient hydration product only when you have sufficient hydration product they will come and touch each other from both the sides and capillary will get segmented. So, minimum curing is required in order to ensure that capillary gets segmented otherwise unsegmented capillary will results in more durability of concrete. So, if you have not done good curing what will happen? Obviously, strength developed will not not be there because hydration has not occurred lot of pore space will be remaining and drying shrinkage can result because the water has gone out. So, it can cause drying shrinkage and this can result in cracks may be aggregated by high ambient temperature and low relative humidity. Holy segmented capillary results in lower durability of concrete. So, this is what is the effect of curing. Now, how do you do curing? We do moist curing. Supposing I got a water cement ratio 0.5 concrete and if I cure it continuously submerged this is continuously submerged the strength will increase in this manner. Keep it 20 days cured strength will increase in this manner. 14 days cured strength will go like this up to 14 days and then it will flatten out. So, 20 days strength will increase nearly up to or 20 is a little bit then it will flatten out. Continuously moist cure will go like this. Continuously in year of course, strength develop into much less with time and 3 days so up to 3 days there will be until slightly more than 3 days. So, what happens is when you have stopped curing after that hydration proceeds for a little while and after that there is no further strength develop. So, therefore, you know strength development I need compressive strength is a function of curing A and if I continuously cure it moisture continuously moisture it then this is what I get you know it increases significant continuously it will go into. So, that is what it is for strength gain I need some amount of minimum curing you know more the moisture I do I will be in this strength will be the concrete will be gaining in this manner. Methods of curing obviously water curing is the number one bonding strain that is how you do you just if it is a slab even a slab like this if it is slab you know concrete is here. So, you make some sort of a barrier some sort of a barrier here on both this sides and simply do you know ah bonding simply do simply do bonding simply do bonding simply do bonding. So, you have bonding water here water is so, these slabs you can actually do bonding slabs you can do bonding bonding bonding bonding can be done on slab. Spraying spray with kind of any kind of pipe and then covering with wet sand so, instead of bonding what you can do is you can just put in sand particularly here and this is to be maintained wet or you put wet Hessian clothes clothes or absorbent covering. So, this could be for slab or for columns also for example, if it is a column you can put actually wet Hessian you can put wet Hessian here Hessian clothes here which will remain wet all the time. So, you give it wet wet with some kind of absorbent. So, this is one you know moistureing is done in this manner. Then you have got foam retention I am covering concrete prior to setting. Of course, you can retain the foam, but that will not be replenishing the water or cover the concrete prior to full setting or even after that. So, water water actually will not go away, but at the same time water will not go away, but at the same time you know it will not replenish the water. Membrane clearing basically you apply resins and waxes on top of the concrete to form a ready you know membrane it can be sprayed or hand brush applied let us say. So, that what it does it will see that no water goes out whatever water is inside that is used up. So, no evaporation. So, both second and third you know this one and this one they will ensure that there is no loss of water, but then there is no loss of water, but then they will not replenish the self-dressing of water. So, these are the methods then you have steam curing. Water proof plastic sitting some people abuse and steam curing. Steam curing is used where you want to get accelerated strength, maybe distressing you are doing. So, you want to do the distressing quickly and that is what where you use this. Moist curing if you see compressive strength, then compare the compressive strength. You see 20 days you know this side is for different water cement ratio. So, you get if the comparison is bonded and Hessian. So, this high one is bonded this is Hessian cloth, this is Hessian cloth Hessian cloth this summer here Hessian cloth is here bonded is there. So, Hessian pond it. So, ponding does a good job ponding does a good job actually ponding does better job ponding is here ponding is here and Hessian is relatively less Hessian is lower one. So, Hessian is lower one and this is for one day this for three days this for 20 days. So, ponding does a better job than Hessian or you know putting an absorbing water absorbing cloth or something covered you know. So, cylinder strength ok basically what do you want to see is a qualitative because quantitative values does not make much of a sensitive very from concrete to concrete. So, Hessian you know ponding is a good thing when you have the facility and also there is a possibility of doing for example, you can do ponding on slabs or horizontal members particularly large horizontal ones, but you cannot do it on color. So, curing by former covering membrane of course, topsy operation which I said, but do not replenish the moisture loss due to cell desiccation that is the problem. Now, you need a minimum days of curing for segmentation of the capillary and it depends upon water cement ratio. For example, water cement ratio point four it is just three days and for water cement ratio point seven it may take one year. So, higher the water cement ratio more days are required to segment the capillaries it is understandable because more higher water cement ratio larger size will be the capillary ports and more will be the capillary ports and they will be more connected you know they are beyond population threshold. So, all of them will be connected. So, code actually specify minimum curing days based on this for example, Indian code says that seven days minimum curing is required for ordinary Portland cement, but if it is puzzle and up blending then you need 10 days in normal weather, but correspondingly you will need 10 and 14 days in normal weather and of course, dry weather like desert areas where you know it is more dry there will be 14 days when you have puzzle and up blended cement, but puzzle and up blended cement or they will require more number of curing days for strength development because that process is slow. So, that is what I saying I S 456 recommendation at least seven days for OPC 10 days for blended cement, concrete mineral admixtures in normal condition, but for dry and hot condition these periods are 10 and 14. Other codes are actually much more elaborate I do not have time here to talk about those they are much more elaborate some of them would talk about the curing depending upon water cement ratio also the kind of your operation losses possible air velocity you know they thus for example, a hard soil better code was quite elaborate in this I say our code is far sorry it is much more simple and simpler ok. So, that is what it is what about temperature? Concrete cast and cure at the indicated temperature let us say this is you know this is basically temperature is 30 degree centigrade one day age. So, age of age and this is 28 days. So, if you cure it at let us say 10 degree centigrade strength is there 20 degree strength is here 30 degree strength is used 40 degree strength is used. So, if you look at 20 degree strength curated 40 degree will be less strength than curated somewhere around 20 22 20 23. Similarly, 3 day strength and so on so forth. So, it actually you know higher temperature early strength gain is high this is gone it is almost close to that higher temperature early strength gain high, but later 20 day strength it is actually reduces down. So, maximum 20 day strength you are getting at 20 degree centigrade when you are casting and curing at the same temperature all right. Now, we talk in terms of something called maturity temperature effect what has been what has been seen is that T measured about 11 degree centigrade and if you might you know for let us say T1 delta T1. So, it was maintained at delta T1 T1 for delta T1 time T2 for delta T2 time etc etc and some this up this is what is called maturity and it has been seen then maturity log scale degree centigrade days versus compressive strength can be linearly, linearly. So, higher temperature lesser time you will get almost same effect when you have lower temperature and longer period. That is the idea and that is the gives you the idea about steam curing that is gives you the idea about steam curing. So, we will just look at steam curing steam curing concrete if you apply immediately after you know it is then if you apply immediately after strength gain is poor, but if you maintain it at 74 degree centigrade you are somewhere here in this curve 54 is somewhere there 31 is somewhere there 91 strength gain you do not get. So, compressive strength at different age it is given our 72 hours 3 day strength. So, somewhere around 74 or so degree centigrade you get strength good strength in 3 days if you are looking for very high temperature doesn't give you very high strength. Generally steam curing steam at atmospheric pressure will have low you know it will have about 75 80 degree centigrade. So, what you do is you do not apply immediately because then strength gain you do not get. So, there is a delay period this is the delay period then there is a steam heating period maintain that temperature you know supply the steam and maintain it then cool it. So, basically something like 5 to 20 so if you do it for about 15 to 20 you know 15 to 15 hours 13 14 hours of steam curing you can develop you know this is the kind of practice that we do get good strength all right. So, strength steam curing is something like this typical steam curing cycle and this is if you are trying to get RD strength. So, you can summarize now basically we have looked into basically we have looked into all the methods of compaction and then you know the mechanism how it how the compaction occurs. And lastly then we looked into curing the methods of curing need for curing importance of curing that is what we have highlighted. One thing the curing is very important from durability purpose which people quite often ignore it is good for strength development, but that minimum curing is absolutely essential for durability. We quite often try to you know you ignore it also because of the kind of practices that you have if it is a sprinkled one continuous in a pre-cash factory that is a good curing, but in situ when curing is done quite often it is ignored it would be the most unskilled person would be doing it. Now, such curing do not have this system the strength will be lower durability also might be effective. Another contractual problem is string in Indian scenario curing is always part of concreting. So, obviously, it is not a separate item. So, therefore, also the strength development is. So, that is all as the summary and you know summary of also the module 5 where you have looked largely into the fresh concrete issues and concrete production process. The curing completes it. Thank you very much. === Lecture 21 Transcript === Welcome to module 6 lecture 1. In this module, we shall be looking into strength of concrete and as we know that concrete is a particulate system bonded particulate system. So, your particles are there which are bonded largely mechanical bonds and therefore, it is not very strong in tension. You can pull it apart easily while if you push it is relatively stronger it can take lot more load. So, therefore, when you talk of strength of concrete our mean first or emphasize is on compressive strength of concrete however, we will be discussing about tensile strength of concrete as well. One tensile and similar other properties related strength properties as well. So, therefore, general outline is of course, cube strength I will mention y cube strength quickly then fracture mechanism and therefore, what affects the strength the mix parameters largely or basic mechanics of mechanism of failure and all that we will look into in this lecture. Strength of concrete is needed for structural design and usually we determine through specimen testing. Since concrete is a structural material and we make structure out of it therefore, it is required for structural design strength of the concrete is required because safety is a primary issue. So, we determine strength of concrete by specimen strikes testing and determine strength depends on specimen type it depends on specimen type you know it depends on specimen type it depends on specimen type and of course, also on test conditions for example, strength of cylinder cylindrical specimen is lower than cube of same concrete and in situ cube strength in structure is lower than both. So, you see it depends upon types of specimen you test. In Indian scenario we do test cubes and that is why this heading cube strength that is why the heading cube strength not only in India Europe, UK of course, from where the you know the concepts of cube strength came to India they do use cube largely North America and even North and South America and Japan those countries use cylinder. So, it is a type of specimen that is very important and we test the specimen and test condition also affect the strength that is the first. Now, in situ strength can be related to the cube strength you know whatever is the cube strength it can be related to the strength in actual structure in some manner and therefore, cube strength is a relative measure of the mix that I am using you know we have looked into mix proportioning and it is making totally the casting the procedure of production and all that. So, basically cube strength since I am preparing it separately not taking from the structure cube surface separate separately specimens are prepared separately and that is not taken from the structure therefore, cube strength largely measure the relative strength potential of the mix basically. So, it is relative strength potential of the mix proportion only and structure strength in the structure is somewhat different, but this strength potential or relative strength potential can be related to actual strength one can expect in structure for the design purposes in some manner and therefore, can be used in structural design as such. Let us see if I look at a cube how does it fail? You see this is the failure pattern failure pattern of uniaxial failure pattern that means I have applied I have applied some sort of load on a cube. In a cube specimen this is for the cube specimen. So, since in Indian scenario largely we you know we we test only cubes we will be talking more about the cube strength and many other countries do follow the same. So, in a cube actually we will be applying load through machine platens maybe this is circular one and we apply load like that and the reaction comes from the bottom reaction comes from the bottom you know reaction comes from the bottom and once you have applied load and made it to fail it will fail like this. So, this is the this is the kind of failure plane you can see this is a typical failure plane taken from photograph and you can see this is for normal concrete. So, your aggregates are exposed aggregates are face are exposed and actually crushing of aggregate has not occurred here. So, this is typically the uniaxial you know failure of cube and this is another diagram from another side and all shows that aggregates are exposed you know they do not fail in normal strength concrete. So, failure through aggregate boundary rather than through them and you can have multiple visible crack and this is the shape of the failed specimen as we have seen shape as we have seen. Now, we will explain this why this shape we get it, but one thing we must like to understand from here is that in normal strength concrete failure is through the aggregate boundary rather than through the aggregate themselves. Actually fracture plane therefore, would be passing like this at the aggregate boundary and may be passing through some water and then again through the aggregate boundary. So, if we take a portion of that fracture plane in a axial compression failure fracture plane in normal strength concrete would look like this these are the aggregates and the mortar around and you can have multiple of course cracks here and there etcetera etcetera, but failure plane finally you know as a fracture occurs it would occur through this kind of a situation it will break through the aggregate boundaries. So, that is normal concrete fracture plane passes through boundary, this aggregate boundaries. What are the phases in concrete? So, far we have looked into aggregate is one of the phase a very strong in normal strength concrete you know in high strength concrete of course, you try to attain the pay strength such that it nearly matches with that of the aggregate strength and thereby or whatever other phases you know all other phases strength of all other phases almost matches with that of aggregate therefore, aggregate may also fail in high strength concrete, but normal strength concrete up to let us say 60 MPa concrete aggregate normally does not fail the failure is through the aggregate boundary and the phases other phases present in the concrete is a you know paste phase. So, it is the paste paste phase phase is the paste phase you know there is a paste phase paste phase. So, paste aggregate when I say I say coarse aggregate as well as a fine aggregate you can as you have seen earlier it is aggregate and mortar and in the mortar again the paste and the fine aggregate system. So, paste can be considered as a phase, but one actually can identify and another phase well it is not a phase, but transition zone between the aggregate and the paste phase. So, this we call as interfacial transition zone we call as interfacial transition zone. So, this is nothing, but your paste boundary if this is your aggregate this the boundary boundary boundary of the boundary of the boundary of the like you will have some this is your bulk paste let us say bulk paste. So, this is the boundary surrounding and this could be this could be something different this could be something different you know this could be something different. For example, this could be the bulk paste phase. So, this is about so, this is my this I can call this as bulk paste aggregates and there is a transition zone which is about 30 micron, 30 micron thick this is called aggregate paste interfacial transition paste interfacial transition zone aggregate paste interfacial transition zone you know and because this is not smooth here aggregate there is a bulk paste, but there is a transition zone between this two and this roughly about 30 micron thick. So, this is you can you can call it as a phase and this is very very important. So, you have got actually aggregate and then you have got paste and then you have got it is it you have got it is it you have got it is it the paste aggregate interface has properties different than either bulk paste or aggregate and is called it is it. So, it is different than the bulk paste itself bulk paste itself it is different than bulk paste itself or you know aggregate itself. So, it is different than paste and aggregate and that is why you call it it define it almost as a separate paste. Now, why it is we can we will be able to actually understand gradually we will be able to understand it gradually. Now, strength of paste is attributed to cohesion you know paste because CHS gel. So, between the gel particles across gel water cohesive forces something of the vendor was kind of forces exist. So, you see the strength of the paste. So, paste if you want to separate out you have to actually break this cohesion force. So, therefore, paste strength could be quite high large discrepancy of course, exist between the theoretically estimated strength calculate calculated from bonding forces and observed fracture strength. For example, if you calculate I mean if you get X strength from theoretically strength from theory why how because strength power bond is known strength power bond is known you know the vendor was born vendor was born vendor was kind of bond vendor was born. So, I know strength power vendor was born and if I also know number of bond number of bond number of bond per unit area then I can calculate out the theoretical strength. So, I got to know actually number of strength from theory that would be actually strength power unit bond and if I know number of bond power unit area then I can find out strength power unit area. So, I can find out strength power unit area. So, that is your X let us say now this can be estimated theoretically what has been observed is that theoretically estimated strength is 10 to 1000 times more. So, this X theoretical theoretical you know or whatever you call it sigma theoretical sigma theoretical let us say for tensile strength is theoretical is 10 to 1000 times more than sigma actual. So, therefore, this is the large discrepancy whatever theoretically you calculate does not actually exist. So, what why it is the difference had been attributed to existence of cracks and flaws within material even before any load applied. So, even before you have load applied the load the material is not absolutely homogeneous if you have just the paste even the paste is not all solid to be some flaws if they are not cracks cracks can come from shrinkage and similar sort of thing. But, other kind of flaws would be there which are inherent to the system for example, capillary pores and you know gel pores of course, does not take part as too small to influence in a significant way the strength, but it can still influence largely it is the capillary pores which are the flaws within the material. So, there is difference that comes in 10 to 1000 times that is essentially attributed to this essentially attributed to flaws or pores within the material. On tensile load application at a critical straight fracture initiates from existing cracks or flaws and propagates spontaneously when rate of strain energy releases higher than rate of energy required to create new fracture surface. What is actually what is failure or what is fracture what is failure failure means material is getting separated out under tensile load let us say. So, if we have some material some material and I am applying pull from this side pull from this side somewhere the material gets separated. So, this is material is getting separated now this separation means creating new surface. So, you are creating a surface here and creating a new surface there so, it is actually now kind of a new surface and kind of new surface is being created you know which is matching of course. So, by pulling them apart you have actually created two new surfaces. Now, each surface is associated with kind of surface energy there is an interface between solid and liquid or solid and air or air or liquid and the interface always there is some sort of energy associated with it because the material here material here will be material here here will be pulled you know it will be interacting with materials on all directions where one in the surface is it will have it will have cohesive forces which will pull which will get you know the other other particle on the side or the solid side will pull whereas, here there is no such material. So, there is a kind of a surface energy existing at the surface surface energy exists as a surface and this occurs to any interface. So, since there is a surface energy required at the surface to create a new surface you must provide that surface energy and where from this energy comes in case of fracture or failure you are applying load which means that you are applying stress this is causing a strain before failure. So, this half stress into strain is actually strain energy and when the strain energy supplied is high or rate of strain energy will supplied is high you know and is released is higher then rate of energy required to create new fracture surface fracture will propagate spontaneously fracture will propagate spontaneously and this is what was actually sposulated by Griffith somewhere around 1918 or so around that time maybe second half of the second decade of 20th century when you was looking at the as as a failure of glass or such brittle material. So, decrease in strain energy for elliptic crack of length 2 C 1 in a plate of unit thickness is considered together with surface energy. So, that is what you did. So, let us see how what did you do what did you do well I think I will come back to this diagram, but let us let me look at one more diagram slightly later and then I will come back I will just come back again to this diagram. For example, this one so if you have a hole and you try to in this one is a strain compression suppose I try to pull it along this direction suppose I try to pull it along this direction I try to pull it along this direction you know pull it along this direction pull it along this direction. So, let me let me go back to my earlier slides itself, earlier slides itself and let me just draw it for draw it for the sake of explanation. Supposing I have got supposing I have got a surface something like this there is a hole and this is my material this is my material there is a hole and I am pulling this material from this side then what will happen this crack will try to expand. Now, if this crack tries to expand or this crack tries to expand or this hole tries to expand the fracture propagates along this direction right. So, fracture propagates along this direction that means it creates new surfaces here new surfaces here. Now, the stress around a hole for an elliptic hole one can estimate stress concentration concentration around an elliptic hole can be estimated from last is it a theory and if you apply more load what will be the further stress that one can find out and correspondingly the strain energy one can find out expression for strain energy these are available solution of elastic theory these are already available and then the rate of strain energy change with this crack width you know 2 C 1 2 C 2 C L if I call it this is this was actually determined and from this if you equate that rate of strain energy in the limiting case rate of strain energy release is equal to rate of surface energy required. So, if you equate this you can find out what is called a critical stress. So, you can find out what is called critical stress. So, critical stress is that stress at which the fracture propagates spontaneously. So, that was the idea so this is the release of energy pi C square pi C square sigma square and half crack length is C in this particular case and 4 C T is the fracture energy. So, you know because why the T is the T is the surface energy and thickness is taken as unity. So, you can assume there is a plate sort of thing which is under tension with a unit thickness. So, the area would be 2 surfaces if you want to create if you half crack with this 2 C. So, crack with itself or whole itself is 2 C it is would will be 2 C. So, this is your elliptic crack this is 2 C this is 2 C into the thickness T which is unity. So, into 1 and this side again 2 C so 4 C T is the surface energy per unit area. So, 4 C T is the surface energy 4 C T is the surface energy right. Now, required surface energy because 2 C is this full length C is half C crack with this C C is half crack length. So, 4 C T and corresponding leave from the stress concentration concept from theorem velocity C T 1 can find out pi C square sigma square by E is a released energy. So, when rate of this one rate of this one and rate of this one is same at a given C at that C you know the stress for a given C is known to me. So, sigma corresponding to that C would so would would is a critical stress. So, let me just differentiate this this will come as twice pi C sigma square by E and that must be equals to 4 T. So, if I take this if I take this force you know if I take this if I take this if I take this rate of strain energy release this is this situation rate of strain energy. So, at this stress at the stress corresponding to this point is a critical stress. So, therefore, you can actually by E this is here this is by E this is by E square this is by E sorry E and therefore, you can find out sigma is equals to this will be 2. So, 2 T E divided by this is cancel out pi C everything under root. So, critical stress is 2 T E pi C everything under root where C is the half crack root. So, you see this is what this is the this corresponds to this state where the strain energy release rate is equals to this low per this length rate of strain energy release is same as rate of strain with respect to C of course. So, that is critical stress that is critical stress that is critical stress. So, sigma T is equals to 2 E T. So, you can see the critical stress at which fracture will propagate spontaneously is a function of the half crack rate. Now, if already some crack or holes are existing they would behave like that. So, in other words this you can think of in terms of if there are this is the critical stress sigma T elastic modulus energy required to create new surface and this is the crack length. You can say this is the crack length of the electric electric crack. So, it is under tension this is under tensile forces this is under tensile forces this is how it will behave. In other words this place a major role this place a major role this place a major role. So, if already some holes are existing and if already some holes are existing and they are dimensions. So, larger the dimensions less will be the critical stress. So, they will start actually fracture will start propagating from them at some stress that is sigma T. Now, in concrete you have lot of capillary pores lot of capillary pores and therefore, multiple cracks would actually generate you know multiple cracks will generate. So, this is your required energy line here it will not be a single not will be a straight line because it will be some total of number of straight lines. So, therefore, because there are number of holes number of holes and corresponding to for example, at some sigma 0 at this is C 0 cracks will start propagating at some such other 6 sigma 1 you know cracks will start propagating from a smaller sized smaller sized voids or holes or pores that are existing and so on so forth. So, that is for the actually multiple cracks in concrete. So, multiple holes in concrete and from there actually crack starts propagating. So, largest hole for the crack will start propagating from largest hole even if there is no shrinkage cracks. If there are shrinkage cracks from there it can propagate whatever is the largest holes or flow in the material from there the crack would start propagating and then possibly join the mortar cracks in the mortar which also might start you know which I mean more other other crack somewhere else and once they join all together the failure or overall fracture occurs. So, that is how the mechanism of failure of concrete and this you can understand. Supposing I apply tensile load to concrete tensile load to concrete it should ideally fail uniaxial tensile strength ideally it should fail like this and this load is you know directly if I have been able to apply this is this is because this is a brittle material. So, it is weak in tension because particle bonds are not very strong bonds are not very strong. So, this is weak in tension and if you look at uniaxial compression applying load like this from this side to this and this side to this uniaxial compression it might develop multiple fracture ideal uniaxial compression because material is strong in compression just go to the next diagram and then we will come back again. So, supposing I apply biaxial both this sides force from this side force from this side now what will happen when I force apply force from this side it will actually try to material will try to move away in this direction and when I push it because from this side also material will try to move towards this direction therefore, you will have cracks like this. So, in case of cubes whenever you are applying load whenever you are applying load materials had tendency to go along this direction because of persons effect you know materials is a material as a tendency to move along this direction because of persons effect material is a tendency to move along this direction because of persons affect. If it is biaxial applying load like this this will be further move in you so in biaxial case you can see the cracks are vertical that means, material is trying to go by along this direction sup tension x along this direction and crack comes because of traction. In this one, uniaxial therefore, crack can come in both the direction, uniaxial compression crack can come in both the direction. And if you now recall the situations where you had actually seen from both the sides, we have seen the failure plane we are looking like this both the sides, you know both the sides it was looking like this, you had something of this kind. If you remember the failure plane that we have seen earlier where something of this kind, you know something of this kind, failure plane we saw in case of concrete we are both the because under uniaxial compression material we try to move in both the transverse direction. And the concrete is weak in tension therefore, it will fail. While if you apply from all three direction compression, you can really do nothing, it will not fail so easily. You know if you apply compression from all three directions, apply compression from all three direction this side, this side, this side as well as you know compression from all the sides, crack shell situation. It can withstand good load of load, physically you can understand what will happen if you try to compress it from all the sides, simply the voids will get you know they will get reduced. Possibly all particles will come close to each other. Now after that after that you know crushing them at a atomic level is not possible. So, it can take actually enormous amount of load under crack shell situation, by axial of course, because there is no tension. So, anyway that is separate issue. So, it can take much larger load under crack shell situation. By axial failure will be like this, uniaxial failure will be like this. So, failure of concrete therefore, we understand even the compression failure essentially is occurring not really by compression, but because of the tension in the transverse direction. Let us see something more, transition in the transverse direction, transfer, so this is what it is. Supposing you are applying compression like this, compression like this, there will be tension along this direction. So, if you have a capillary pore large pore or large fissure or kind of a you know crack or whatever it is actually the crack will propagate in this manner, crack will propagate in this manner right even under compression. And this once the crack has propagated up to this or this crack you know this is the 2 c. So, you can see the compressive strength compressive strength is also related to also related to sigma t critical critical that we talked about. So, compressive uniaxial compressive strength will be related to critical stress that we had over you know some or other I mean it is not very easy to model them, but it will be somehow related to the sigma t that relationship perhaps is not so easily understood it requires perhaps it will require more research. So, that is it that is it. So, therefore, what we have understood so far just quickly trying to re look at it failure of concrete takes place to aggregate interface in normal strength concrete high strength concrete can occur there. So, you will come back to that interface little bit more and interface exists which is a transition from aggregate phase to the phase phase around 30 micron. If you look at the failure of concrete the failure occurs at the aggregate boundary. So, therefore, there is a phase which we call as interfacial transition is important also we looked into what could be a failure mechanism we have seen that you have seen that in such material theoretically estimated strength is much higher than actually that is realized and this must be because of some kind of flaws. So, stress concentration around flaws or holes existing that one can look into and fracture process can be thought of as generating new surfaces creating new surfaces which require surface energy. So, rate of strain energy release if it is more than that required to create new surface surface energy required to create you know fracture will propagate spontaneously under tension. Now, concrete under compression also fails in tension in the transverse direction and that is what we have just glued into. So, we will follow it up further will follow it up further let us just look into more of it. So, crack go in compression due to transverse transfer tension that is what is most important to understand. So, therefore, if we look at the previous one you know it was sigma t was sigma t was something like under root 2 e t divided by pi into c. So, c is the half crack width and if we assume that we have do not have really shrinkage cracks in the situation shrinkage cracks has not occurred which actually do not necessarily not large shrinkage crack cannot occur in concrete then this c would correspond to something like a pore radius pore radius radius of the flow that is existing. So, it will something like pore radius therefore, some sort of a measure of the pore radius if I have c will be related to pore radius t of course, is surface energy. Now, e is modulus of elasticity of pore free solid pore free solid and surface energy is also is that of pore free solid. So, therefore, if pore free solid I consider and I find out sigma 0 for the pore free solid for a porous solid it can be simply related to this portions can be actually related to this constant etcetera can be related to sigma 0 into 1 minus p because more the porosity this effective you would get reduced effective t would also get reduced. So, this is simple model actually that could be much more complex model, but one can fit in empirical kind of relationship of compressive strength with some sigma 0 1 minus p into another constant. Now, sigma 0 is also is a strength at 0 porosity which is a almost difficult to determine r m is a measure of average or some kind of a mean pore size or some sort of means pore size you know this tells us that it would be inversely proportional to the pore size. So, simple relationships of this kind were tried out and this is called you know average pore size mean distribution radius is called mean distribution radius where b i is the volume of pore corresponding to r i radius. So, this is the sum total of all volume of pore and this is actually logarithmically. So, this is logarithmically l n r i. So, mean logarithmic pore radius because radius pore radius varies in logarithmic scale you know it will vary from as you shall see from nano size to fraction of millimeter size. So, over a large range so, it is better to express them in logarithmic scale and this is the long mean radius is weighted average with respect to volume. So, something of this kind this is called mean distribution radius. So, sigma t if you recall was something like this and therefore, one can possibly write E 0 T 0 where E 0 T 0 stands for pore free pore modulus of elasticity of pore free material T 0 is a T 0 is a surface energy for pore free material when it is some porosity already existing in the material. So, both this can be written as E 0 into 1 minus p and this can be multiplied into T 0 into 1 minus p. So, if you take it out this will be the constant and 1 minus p will come out and critical stress will be something like this. So, therefore, from this it can be understood that the strength is a function of porosity higher this relationship is too simple, but still it is good to understand qualitatively that higher the porosity strength will be lower and more the larger the pore sizes strength will be again lower. So, critical stress because critical stress is related to this now when does when does you know so, one can possibly write compressive strength is a function of this critical stress tensile critical stress as well because compressive failure is also failure due to tension in transverse direction. So, with all this you know one can empirically relate sigma c 2 1 minus p divided by under root r m this is a simple relationship qualitative just to understand that compressive strength cube compress strength or cylinder compress strength will be a function of the porosity of the concrete. And also a function of root over mean radius some sort of mean radius which we are calling as mean distribution radius mean distribution radius you know mean distribution radius and there has been relationship develop along this direction while putting this as a cement content or various other factors etcetera etcetera. So, one thing is understood most important what I would like to point out here is the strength of concrete increases as porosity increases and pore size decreases increases strength of concrete increases as porosity increases increases and pore size you know strength of concrete increases porosity decreases. decreases. Strength of concrete increases as porosity decreases porosity and pore size decreases. Yes, I think that is what it is. Strength of concrete increases as porosity and pore size decreases both. So, if porosity decrease, strength will increase, pore size decrease, strength will increase. This is what we must understand. There is a fundamental. There is a fundamental. Now, volume of pore and pore radius, one can actually obtain from what is known as pore size distribution curve. I will not go into the basis of this, but what I would like to tell you that it, the volume of pores can be related to this mean radius, some dispersion coefficient and overall porosity. So, volume of porosity corresponding cumulative volume of porosity can be related to mean distribution radius. We can be expressed. We is the cumulative porosity at any point. So, included volume from marker intrusion porosimetry, but let me say this is cumulative porosity. Cumulative porosity can be related, cumulative porosities from small pore size to other pore size. So, porosity can be related to porosity, cumulative porosity can be related to pore size and mean in terms of mean distribution radius and overall porosity. Therefore, I can express this is called mean radius, which was same as R m, this R 0.5, median radius equals to R m or it is called mean distribution radius, mean distribution radius, mean distribution radius. B is the volume fraction of pore set radius R and this is some dispersion coefficient, this is overall porosity. All I am trying to point out that porosity, this you know they can relationship existing between cumulative porosity and R and from this what happens. You can actually you can actually obtain you know L n R versus cumulative porosity, this sort of curve one can obtain, but what is this implication in our case. We can actually find out the porosity by assuming simple model, for example, this is the cement, this is the water all outside and we can R 0.5 and D we can express to mix factors. So, through some models and then if I know R 0.5 and then if I know R 0.5 as a function of let us say W by C degree of hydration etcetera etcetera age, T etcetera, then I can get the full pore size distribution and we know that R 0.5 is related to strength, this is related to strength, this is related to strength. So, therefore, I can relate strength to, I can actually relate strength to strength can be related to strength can be expressed as a function of W by C H and T, because strength is strength is a function of strength is a function of F R 0.5 R 0.5 N 5, now phi can be estimated from power small, R 0.5 if I can relate to water cement ratio, I degree of hydration in time, then I can relate strength to all this. So, it is possible to, it is possible to use simple model to arrive at you know R 0.5 and D as a function of water cement ratio and this just as a qualitative term, I do not think I am going to the expression of algebra, but what I mention is that R can be related to, this is the degree of hydration alpha, degree of hydration, degree of hydration, hydration alpha, this can be related to age and water cement ratio and R capillary, mean capillary porosity can be related to water cement ratio and age and overall R 0.5 also can be related to, overall R 0.5 for the gel post it can be related, R 0.5 can be related to water cement ratio, because this is related to water cement ratio and this is also related to water cement ratio and time age. So, using this kind of a model, one can calculate the segmentation age, if you remember we talked in terms of curing and theoretical and estimated segmentation age seems to match somewhat, anyway that is not my concern, but I am trying to point out that R 0.5 can be related to R 0.5 can be related to water cement ratio, that means the pore size is related to W by C. So, this is the value of water cement ratio, which is the value of porosity is related to W by C age and T that is you know age is T, age is T and degree of hydration, age is T and degree of hydration, and degree of hydration. Now, degree of hydration itself is a function of W by C and T. So, degree of hydration is a function of so therefore, porosity and pore size is related to water cement ratio and we have seen that pore sizes, pore size mean pore size and porosity and porosity govern strength, strength hence strength is governed by water cement ratio and age. So, just let me let me put it in words, now let me put it in now words, let me put it in now words, you see what we have seen the R 0.5, R 0.5 is a function of R 0.5 gel to some gel porosity and it is a function of water to cement ratio and age. Similarly, R 0.5 capillary is also a function of water to cement ratio and age and we know the porosity itself is a function of water cement ratio. So, in other words what we are trying to say qualitatively quantitatively we can leave out what we are trying to say is strength of pace depend on of course, born and number strength, but it is made most depend on porosity and pore sizes. This will be the main contribute effect in normal strength concrete and capillary porosity and total porosity is dependent on water cement ratio that is what we have seen and pore sizes also governed by water cement ratio that is what just now we have seen. So, pore sizes both pore sizes so porosity increases with W by C, pore size increases with W by C and if pore size increases strength decreases hence strength will decrease hence strength will decrease. So, that is what is Abram's law you know total porosity demo. So, strength is governed by water cement ratio that is what is given by Abram's law and Abram's law is something like this strength is a function of inversely you know it is a kind of reduces with water cement ratio these are two constants these are two constants. So, why why does it reduces water cement ratio because higher the water cement ratio by porosity will increase and my mean distribution radius will also increase and we have seen that strength is a function of porosity higher the porosity strength is lower 1 minus p higher the mean distribution radius strength is lower because it is related to under root 1 over under root mean distribution radius. So, that is why strength is a function of water cement ratio that is what was discovered by the Abram in 1930's and 30's you know very early 20's actually. So, gel pores the what are the pores in cement ratio material I think I have talked about this earlier gel pores is one of them capillary pores in the cement paste the you can see the orders and macro pores due to air entrainment and poor compaction. So, all this will affect the strength right all this will this of course, affects the strength less because the size is very small. So, because larger size pores affects the strength therefore, their effect of strength less but they actually is a bigger role in shrinkage and creep and of course, in concrete you will have it is at porosity and this it is at porosity comes because of wall effect which you have already talked in relation to you know when we are talking of aggregate packing right. So, at the boundary of the aggregate you will not have good packing of the cement particles then one side at hydration growth hydration growth hydration product will grow from the bulk paste side not from the aggregate side and if shrinkage occurs space strings aggregate dome bleed water water has a tendency to come up because this specific group it is low and if it gets step below and aggregate there will be bleed water tapping. So, therefore, bleed water trapping and all this makes this zone as we talked about aggregate motor interface this zone vulnerable actually there the porosity is more there the porosity is there the porosity is more. So, porosity is more here more porosity more pore because of wall effect hydration growth will take place for cement particle you know if I have a cement particle here it will go from cement particle here their packing will not be very good and hydration will take place more along this direction very little along this direction shrinkage occurs shrinkage will occur there. So, even before you are anything any load has been applied even before you have applied any load you might have some sort of a fissure existing here you know you might have some sort of fissure existing here because you will have materials there. So, therefore, you will have fissures or plate like pores existing there if the bleed water coming in getting trapped here bleed water coming in getting trapped here you know bleed water coming in getting trapped here because some water trying to go up it gets trapped here then you will have again some sort of fissure existing there. So, they are the one which starts the they are the one which are the actually from where my fracture starts propagating because they are the largest size pore and from their fracture starts propagating join some of the pores in the bulk paste and when all of them have joined actually overall fracture local. So, let us progress further we have understood that therefore, ITZ porosity the strength of the concrete is governed by ITZ because they will have the largest porosity up to about 70 percent of ultimate load cracking is largely due to ITZ cracks because ITZ would have larger fissures and from there cracks starts propagating as we said it extends around 30 micron from the aggregate surface and bleed water trapping will aggregate mentioned in connection the bleeding if we have we have not talked much about bleeding, but I have just explained you right now because when bleeding occurs because you see the concrete is made up of material 7 different specific gravity cement has got a specific gravity of 3.15 aggregates will have something in between if I am not using very heavy aggregate like hematite in heavy concrete. So, in ordinary concrete aggregates will have around 2.62.7 or at best 3 as a specific gravity, but water is 1. So, it will have a tendency to come up all the time and if it gets in case where heavy bleeding is occurring high water cement ratio system you know cement is not able to hold the water whatever tendency to come up and it might get trapped below the aggregate. So, if it gets trapped below the aggregate that will be official you know all this we have just mentioned the few minutes before. So, therefore, bulk paste porosity and pore sizes they are governed by water cement ratio that is what we have seen and since water cement ratio governs it is that porosity is also more and pore sizes are larger and this is also governed by water cement ratio larger water to cement ratio bleed water trapping chance could be higher the shrinkage effects and even you know the porosity in the it is that is always more than the bulk paste porosity. High water cement ratio means bulk paste porosity is more it is that porosity will be still more. So, it is that that is what governs the strength in the normal concrete hence concrete again therefore, concrete follows are brown slope. So, cement paste follows are brown water will follow are brown slope and concrete will also follow are brown slope and that is because higher the water cement ratio I will have more pores in the system because we have seen in the you know in the earlier modules that capillary porosity is a function of water cement ratio more the water cement ratio more will be the capillary pores. When you look at the hydration process you can recollect you know we are talking about expanding cluster model more water cement ratio more pores more capillary pores and size of a pore will also increase with water cement ratio that is what we have seen today. Therefore, higher the water cement ratio strength will be lower both for cement concrete and water as well and this is what possibly the next diagram will show this diagram will show paste strength or water strength or anything of that kind you know water cement ratio higher the water cement ratio compressive strength reduces compressive strength reduces higher the water cement ratio. So, therefore, this is this is the fundamentals. So, water cement ratio is the fundamental one which governs the strength of concrete which governs the strength of concrete and that is what we have understood today right and why does it affect because higher the water cement ratio I will have more capillary porosity my pore sizes will be larger my pore sizes will be larger right my pore sizes will be larger and size of the pore governs the strength larger the size critical stress required to initiate fracture from that pores will be smaller which means that crack will start generating first and propagate again faster and also we have seen that compressive strength is actually compressive failure is because of tensile failure again tensile failure again. So, therefore, this is what we have understood we will see the role of aggregate and other things in the subsequent classes. So, we have essentially seen the role of paste role of ITZ mainly role of porosity and water cement ratio. So, I think the first lecture gives us this idea why strength is a functional water cement ratio is very important to understand that strength in this all this kind of material decreases with increase in water cement ratio. So, therefore, trek in getting high strength concrete is using reduced water cement ratio reduce it as much as possible keeping in mind that you have to also take care of the workability we said earlier that below the consistency standard consistency the water may not be sufficient you know to make the flowable flow paste flow not at all it will remain dry in consistency paste. So, these issues are there, but the technique of getting high strength concrete therefore, we also on this is this understanding that lower the water cement ratio lower will be the porosity and porosity. And that is the way you know from that only we proceed towards high strength concrete. High strength concrete is not the issue at all at the moment we are looking at normal strength concrete. So, today we have understood role of paste essentially ITZ and mainly we have looked into this. So, next class we will be into aggregate and other factors. So, with this thank you very much. . === Lecture 22 Transcript === Welcome to module 6 lecture 2. We will continue with strength of concrete, aggregate contribution. Also we will look at some other contributions. So if general outline of this discussion should be paste aggregate bond, where we will talk about paste strength, then water cement ratios, surface roughness, chemical composition etc. related to the you know aggregate, then effect of aggregate properties. So we will also look a little bit on air and treatment, compaction and age and lastly we will just introduce the tensile strength of concrete. So in the last lecture actually we looked into the effect of essentially how you know strength is controlled or governed by water to cement ratio, composition strength of concrete, of is or cube composition strength. You know we measured in terms of cube or cylinder composition strength and that is essentially governed by water cement ratio as a major factor. The other factors some of the other factors will come to light today. First is paste aggregate bond, paste to aggregate bond. You know as we said that concrete is a particulate system, concrete is a particulate system like this aggregates and aggregates etc. etc. all kind of aggregates you will have and they are bonded by you know paste, paste system, paste aggregate system. So this bond is very very important and we have studied we talked about we said that aggregate paste interface, this place a very strong role. So therefore one has to look into how you know what governs the paste aggregate bond. So let us just have a look at that and how it affects the concrete strength. So we can look into that and to do that one can look into this kind of a diagram which shows say figure this one, this one you know this one shows diagram one shows if we have different cement the flexural strength of paste would be something like this, flexural paste strength of paste would be something like this, flexural strength of paste. Two shows strength of paste aggregate bond, two shows strength of paste aggregate bond. So this is the paste aggregate bond you know. So then three is the ratio of bond to paste strength, ratio of bond to paste strength you know. So this is this side right hand side is a ratio. These are the strength in MPA, these are the strength in MPA and this is the curve for ratio. So for example here this strength, flexural strength of the paste and strength of paste aggregate bond and this is a ratio of bond to paste strength. So this divided by this, now you can see this value is somewhere here. When it comes to this, this increases because this is lower, this reduces but not as much as this. Here it will still be low and here here basically you know the ratio, this is quite low, this is low. So ratio is also somewhere there but here this increases, this also reduced. So this ratio increases. So you can see the ratio varies, it is not a constant line. In other words paste strength, bond strength, paste strength do not directly go on or 100% go on the bond strength. You know if had it been the case, for example if I increase the strength of the paste itself, flexural strength, let us say in this particular case or in a way a measure of tensile strength let us say. And strength of paste aggregate bond, this strength of paste aggregate bond had this ratio, you know it would have been solely dependent on flexural strength of the paste or strength of the paste itself then I would have got a constant line but I am not getting a constant line. It means there are other factors which go on. So strength of paste aggregate bond is not only controlled by strength of the paste, but necessarily controlled by the strength of the paste. Where strength of the paste is higher, bond strength is here, where in this case strength of the paste is much lower but the bond strength strength is not that much low. So this ratio actually increases, had it been all same, it would have possibly increased. And if you see here paste strength is quite low but bond strength is quite high, it is as high as this. So this value has increased, the ratio has increased significantly. So bond strength is a function of the paste strength all right but you know this is I mean it is not a constant, it is not necessary that you increase the paste strength bond strength will increase. So that is the first point. So bond strength may increase or may not increase. So bond strength is lower than that of the paste that of course we have seen and bond strength is not necessarily proportional to paste strength, not proportional to paste strength. I will call it cement paste strength, you know it is not proportional to paste strength. So that is one must understand. ITZ governs the concrete strength, ITZ governs the concrete strength that is what we have seen. So the bond is very very important. Now what governs this paste aggregate bond? And type is a factor but there are other factors. So let us see other factors. This bond is mostly mechanical, physical and in very few cases can be chemical but mostly it is mechanical and at best physical, mechanical bond. You know you might have roughness of the surface of the aggregate and paste might come in there, paste might simply come and sit there, paste might simply come and sit there. So it is mechanical bond, you know mechanical, you want to pull out this is the paste. So it could be simply mechanical bond sitting on the roughness of the aggregate. Physical between the paste to paste is physical, paste to aggregate is you know not necessarily not not many times physical bond but adhesive forces can exist because you know one was in plastic state, other is solid. The aggregates are generally solid paste was in plastic state. So there could be some sort of physical bonding may occur but largely it is mechanical bond. Chemical bonds are rare and this occurs essentially in case of post-organic aggregate. So we will just see that you know we will come back to that, come back to that sometime later on that sometime it is chemical, sometime it is chemical largely when you have volcanic source, aggregate from volcanic source, we will come to that sometime later on. Now what are cement ratio effects of bond in a manner similar to that it does to the compressive strength of the paste. So what are cement ratio effect the bond strength in the similar manner like it does to the compressive strength and we have discussed this in the last lecture that ITZ properties its porosity is a function of the water to cement ratio. Effect of surface roughness is evident in low water cement ratio at a very high water benches you know at high water cement ratio benches. Surface roughness is an important factor, surface roughness of the aggregate is an important factor particularly at low water to cement ratio. Because the bond is mechanical so therefore surface roughness is very very important right surface of the aggregate. So if you see what is surface roughness of the aggregate I mean a honeycomb aggregate. If it is a polished surface texture is polished you can have textures, polystructures to rough texture honeycomb structure and so on so forth, textures of aggregates are also classified. So if it is absolutely polished glassy or polished texture then the bond would be poor while if it is rough the bond would be better. It is not nothing to be the shape of the aggregate shape could be circular spherical and even you can have surface somewhat rough or honeycomb depending upon type of aggregate. So roughness is very very important. Now testing this is not very easy effect of roughness but some test has been done. For example bond is created between aggregate surface and the paste and then try to find out through a pullout kind of a test and some results are available typically we will just show it in a kind of table. So some results are available. Volcanic as I said the chemical bonding occurs when you have got volcanic extrusive rocks from volcanic eruption and they can have better bond of strength due to lime silica reaction because cement hydrates have got lime that is what we have seen earlier and this lime can react if the aggregate surface has got some sort of reactive silica. So pozzolonic sort of similar to pozzolonic reaction this can occur and some of the calciras aggregate due to growth of calcium carbonate calcium hydroxide solid solution may exhibit highest range. So because of solid solution of calcium carbonate some calciras aggregate and calcium hydroxide produced from the cement hydration solid solution can form. So this may exhibit highest range but this is very rare this is not very this two are not very chemical bonding is not very common. So mostly it is mechanical as you know I mentioned some aggregates exhibit chemical bonding. Now the cement aggregate bond arises from mechanical physical or chemical bond surface revocity or roughness phase of major role. Mechanical interlocking rather than chemical bonding take in this is a question of surface surface properties take a surface. So the adhesive penetrates into the pores or holes and scratches of the substrate to bond that is what I saying supposing you have got a surface you have got a surface like this with some holes here surface with some holes here you know some holes here honeycomb honey combed honeycomb aggregate surface X as I said and the material goes inside this. So it creates bond. So adhesive that is our aggregates they will penetrate inside to the substrate and creates the bond. So that is what I showed earlier diagram also this mostly mechanical this mostly mechanical the roughness values all the small are quite huge compared to the bond strain bond length. So roughness values this they can be small but in absolute term but large compared to bond length. So bonds are order of nanometer roughness could be order of millimeters micron should be so therefore they are very large and therefore you know roughness is the major issue here. So bond strength bond length is very small so bonded material they penetrate into the roughness. When there was bond can act on surface of dissimilar material but this is not very major role aggregate paste bond is mechanical and this is what the product aggregate paste bond is mechanical and this is what the people you know studied related to roughness. So roughness values in micron for from you know central line. So these are in 1.6 to 6.3 board or toned material is milled material you will have 1.6 to 6.3 labed or polished material. So polished material has got the least grounded material ground material is something you know grinded material. So milled board but surface profile from average central line you know these are the roughness values but aggregate may have larger still larger values. Now this you know this how how does 0.4 water cement ratio I just mentioned earlier 0.4 water cement ratio the reduction in strength because of surface structure could be as low as 0.7 you know strength could be as we said it could be as much as 0.7 70 percent and it vanishes somewhere. So if one looks at this roughness values if one looks looks looks at 0.4 water cement ratio a factor it can be you know roughness smooth to rough rough surface smooth to rough surface if you look at it smooth surface may have strength 70 percent of that of rough surface with 0.65 water cement ratio same is 100 percent. So variations if you have 0.4 water cement ratio strength reduction could be you know the smooth surface can result in reduction in strength to as much as by 30 percent while for 0.65 water cement ratio this does not have any effect. So that is how roughness effects right now what about aggregate properties itself if you look at it ordinary concrete strength versus water cement ratio strength to water cement ratio where is as water cement ratio into the strength decreases but if you come to some light weight aggregate concrete which are weaker aggregate they actually exhibit lower strength especially when water cement ratio is reducing and cracks can pass through the aggregate themselves cracks can pass through the aggregate themselves cracks can pass through the aggregate themselves because weak aggregate. So strength is usually governed by the weakest link if the paste is weak and paste it is weak it will pass through it is not cause cracking of the aggregate but it may start from it is at in any case if it is the largest word but as it initiates it might pass through the aggregate straight away if the aggregate is weak. For example if you just breaks low strength breaks something like 7.5 MPa or breaks or 10 MPa bricks and crush them and make aggregate out of them particularly 7.5 or so bricks and make concrete out of them you will find that the strength of the concrete is low even if your water cement ratio is relatively low strength of the concrete is low and all the fractures planes are passing through the brick aggregate themselves brick aggregate themselves. So strength of the aggregate is an important issue weaker aggregate exhibit lower strength right so more so in low water cement ratio scenario. Modulus of elasticity effects are concrete fracture properties that is effect the strength because we said that the you know modulus of elasticity of the pore free material that governs the critical stress at which fractures propagates spontaneously. So fracture properties you know and thus effect the strength so therefore modulus of elasticity of the aggregate is important because modulus of elasticity will govern the pore free solids modulus of elasticity. The modulus of elasticity of the pore free concrete system is a function of the modulus of elasticity of the aggregate as well as pore free paste you know. So if E of the concrete we just can write it would be a function of E of the aggregate and E of the paste no pore free pore free. So if you look at this you know porosity will bring it down so therefore E of the aggregate has got a role all fracture properties are controlled by modulus of elasticity of the aggregate and therefore this will play a role in you know strength of the concrete high modulus obviously tend to give you higher strength aggregate with higher modulus shares more load at a given strain and relieves the paste. So this is also an issue for example if you just consider this is my aggregate and this is my paste this is my paste and I am loading just a simple model just as a simple model I am loading it like that. So under same deformation so if the deformation occurs are same under same deformation deformation occurring is same you know deformation is same so this has got low E is different this is let us say E is higher E E H E G is higher than E P so E aggregate higher you know it will actually stress P by proportions it will depend upon of course the proportions so the load shared would be P 1 plus P 2 and total load P and P 1 would be related to same deformation so E epsilon into you know and same area let us say volumes are same for the time being then it would be simply P 1 will be equals to strain same into E into you know A E A into epsilon so E aggregate into epsilon plus P 2 will be E paste into A into epsilon both will have same deformation so whichever is higher will share more load share more load if the area is in just for the understanding part of it so higher modulus shares more load at a given strain and relieves the paste so paste will be loaded less it can share more and it can relieve the paste so that is the idea that is the idea that is the idea and size is important because larger the aggregate size for example in this direction size is increasing larger the aggregate size right so size effect larger the size strength to water compressive strength to water cement ratio strength decreases so larger size means stress concentration around you know same stress supposing I have got large size the stress same stress has to pass through it same stress has to pass through it so this is lesser area now you have got smaller sizes smaller sizes occupying same volume so surface area is more more surface area more surface area for smaller size thus as the size of the aggregate increases strength can reduce strength can reduce as the size of the aggregate increases So, more surface area for smaller size for same stress for same force same force stress for larger size will be more larger size would be more. So, therefore, because you know that is it would be more. So, therefore, size has got a roll larger the size strength will be lower strength will be lower right. So, this curve is lower and it has been actually observed that MSA governs the strength how does it govern the strength MSA governs the strength you see it has got two kind of an effect larger the aggregate size stress around the maximum size of the aggregate larger the MSA stress around the maximum size aggregate is going to be higher. But it has got a roll in packing two it has got a roll in packing two you know it larger the size less space should be required to fill it in less space to be required to fill it in less space to be required to fill it in. Now, strength could be lower there strength could be lower there. So, what has been observed is that if you go on increasing MSA along this direction MSA along this direction for lower cement content low cement content strength increases as you increase the MSA and then it does not increase further. Here the strength increases becomes constant and at high cement content strength increases and start decreasing. So, as you increase the you know MSA the as you go on increasing the MSA your aggregate itself is also strong overall there is an increase but at higher what cement content actually this effect of stress concentration around the largest size aggregate starts dominating. Here the aggregate is paste is not very strong low cement content paste is not less you have I mean so paste is less and there may be your you know in a lean concrete situation paste is less. So, its aggregate which dominates the strength more the aggregate larger the aggregate may be you know it larger size of aggregate you can accommodate strength increases. But as you increase it beyond a point the point stress concentration around aggregate starts dominating. So, MSA increasing strength increases in the beginning but it here therefore, you know this is for this is for high cement content situation the strength into this axis is strength strength increases as an in start decreasing. So, what we find is that when you have got mass concrete where paste is relatively low overall strength itself is also low. So, there you can actually accommodate larger aggregate without compromising on to the strength while you have got you know relatively higher strength concrete structural grade of concrete if you increase the MSA strength starts reducing because overall strength is higher overall strength is higher your paste content itself is higher cement is more cement you know cement is high and the stress concentration around aggregate starts affecting lowering down the strength because strength is governed by the weakest link. So, this is the reason why you find that MSA for structural grade of concrete is mostly 20 sometime 40 for mass concrete it is 75 mm or 150 mm and for high strength concrete it might be 10 mm simply or 12.5 very high strength system may not have at all the core strength aggregate itself because uniformity is required stress concentration around aggregate is not desirable non uniform one material to you know transition from one material to another material. So, it should be uniform material as uniform as possible non uniformity always results in stress concentration because modulus of elasticity of the paste and aggregate will be different. So, therefore, there will be stress concentration around aggregate system and that is reduced just lower down right. So, size of the MSA is important basically presence of aggregate particle introduces stress concentration at interface volume of region of stress around aggregate increases with aggregate size right and in fact is lean concrete MSA is higher lean concrete MSA is higher lean concrete MSA is higher because of lower requirement of paste and water thus water cement ratio can be reduced with higher MSA you know you can have low water cement ratio but higher MSA paste should be less paste should be less for higher strength stress concentration discontinues discontinuers and gluing of bond area dominates and therefore, your MSA is limited to certain value something like 20 or 44 structural as I mentioned. Concentration quantity how much is the aggregate quantity particle separate reduces if I have more aggregate this is less aggregate aggregate is paste is more another case I have got more aggregate. So, the particle separation reduces particle separate reduces less fracture length for high concentration. So, if you have high concentration the distance between two aggregates are small high concentration and therefore, fracture length is lower that is what the idea is but the other side of it is aggregate introduces discontinuity and stress concentration and volume region of stress concentration overlaps as aggregate content increases decreasing the average stress the strength increases with aggregate more secondary cracks with high concentration that is also absorbed. So, because of regions of stress concentration would tend to overlap and therefore, actual area turns to becomes larger and you know this reduce this causes more aggregate tends to reduce down the effect somewhat and strength increases well normal strength concrete normal strength concrete actually in high very high strength concrete paste content is in fact, more to counteract the shrinkage effects the shrinkage effects will also come in as your paste is more or cement is more there can be shrinkage effects. So, that might results in cracking of the whole thing. So, your aggregate system more aggregate system the shrinkage effects also will be relatively great generally accepted that strength increases with aggregate content in normal concrete in normal concrete generally accepted the strength increases with aggregate content because aggregate themselves are strong quite often more you know more stronger than the paste itself with increased aggregate content capillary porosity may decrease also average stress in the zone of stress concentration reduces. So, that is the idea you know that is the idea. So, everything is stressed in a similar manner and that is why as you increase aggregate strength increases in ordinary normal I mean normal strength concrete, but where there is x you know high strength concrete you might have to have much higher paste content to ensure that there is a bulk shrinkage shrinkage rather than shrinkage between the aggregate will come to that sometime later on. Strength is related to water content and porosity and you know cement water to cement ratio as we have seen porosity and pore sizes. Now, this is water cement ratio governs the strength that is what we have seen. Now, if you have air content then you introduce more porosity. So, effective water cement ratio in fact would be increasing in a way I can say that way I mean finally, the role of water cement ratio higher water cement ratio results in more porosity. Here, entertainment also can introduce a sport and thus reduces the strength. So, you can think in terms of an effective water to cement ratio being increased. Well, we can now understand very well that actually we have been talking about that you know directly that porosity water cement ratio causes increase in porosity and pore sizes and therefore, there is a reduction in cement. Air entertainment the pores are of course, closed pores. They are closed pores not interconnected well distributed but the sizes are also quite large and they can introduce air and training agent can introduce pores closed pore systems and they have a tendency to reduce of the strength. But we might sacrifice that strength if we are getting benefit in certain other properties particularly durability which you shall see later on. So, air and training agent has also it reduces can reduce the strength by about 5 percent. It can reduce the strength by about 5 percent. Compaction pores are very difficult to define. They can come because of the air void remaining. You have not compacted it properly. So, some air void remaining we have seen that vibration can remove air voids. But supposing you have not done 100 percent vibration there is no honeycomb as such, but the voids are remaining. Now, this air voids will also reduce down the strength. Therefore, proper compaction is absolutely essential in order to ensure that your strength attain strength is proper attain strength is proper. That is what it is. So, effect of compaction. Now, you can see that this is fully compacted concrete. If you do a hand compaction the strength might come down especially low water cement ratio. Because, workability you know the consistency of the paste may not be high enough to compact it easily or flow properties may not be good enough for compaction. And if you have vibrated concrete of course, you can go further, but still poorly compacted concrete can show bad results. And this can happen in low water low paste content. So, this axis is actually your water to cement ratio water to cement ratio and this is your compressive strength. So, compressive strength versus water to cement ratio normally the curve should have been like this, but if I have a poorly hand compacted concrete I will get like this, poorly vibrated concrete I will get like this. Because, there will be compaction pores coming in. So, compaction pores coming in results in this age strength will vary with the age. For example, you have 1 day strength, 3 day strength, 28 day strength and 1 year and so on so forth. So, as the age increases strength increases, compressive strength increases, the strength versus water to cement ratio this strength. So, strength versus water to cement ratio curves they tend to go up with age and we do understand this because with age with age hydration will progress will progress resulting in lesser lower porosity and pore sizes. So, strength so, strength is so, strength is so, strength versus water to cement ratio. So, this is a function hydration itself is the function of course, water cement ratio, but as you can see this effect should be you know this effect is quite prominent in low water cement ratio, but even high water cement ratio is also fairly prominent. Low water cement ratio hydration possibility is actually more, but then of course there is a range beyond which point 4 we are talking of point 3 we are talking of beyond that of course, hydration full hydration is never possible, but does not matter this is we have discussed this sometime earlier that full hydration is not possible beyond certain below certain water cement ratio right, but does not matter this blocking or reduction of the porosity is most important aspect. So, as the age increases porosity will reduce, pore sizes will be finer refinement of the pore size would take place and therefore, strength increases you know and strength to water cement ratio curve tend to go higher right. So, at one day variation is less, but if you look at the variation at one year from high water cement ratio to low water cement ratio that significantly high significantly high significantly high. So, what are the factors those effect strength if we look at it first of all type of cement has got a role let us say this is the paste effect is strength of paste we are looking at strength of paste. So, type of cement has got a role on paste strength at a given age of course, age of the paste. So, paste age type of cement age curing condition because hydration will progress only if you have right kind of curing condition and degree of hydration this three will go on the degree of hydration because you have a slow hydrating cement say one thing is rapid hydrating cement. Now, rapid hydrating cement which you have discussed right in the beginning early on modules rapid hydrating cement would hydrate at a faster rate. Therefore, the type of cement at any given age how much strength develop and talkers or degree of hydration is also a function of that degree of hydration will depend upon type of cement. While a postionic cement or low heat cement we know that degree of hydration will be lesser. So, you know so, this degree of hydration will depend upon age type of cement and curing condition and if you have added at mixtures of course, they would go on the they would if you have added at mixtures they would actually either retard or accelerate or whatever it is. So, they will also control but this degree of hydration is also a function of water to cement ratio as I mentioned this is a function of water to cement ratio and this degree of hydration and water to cement ratio actually controls porosity right controls porosity. Now, at mixtures type of cement and all this actually controls the gel structure and composition. Now, I would like to add here the pore sizes also pore sizes you know it is not only the porosity, but the pore sizes overall pore structure the gel structure everything is governed by this. So, this and the measurement during the moisture condition governs the pace for example, dry specimen shows higher compressive strength, but wet specimen shows lower compressive strength that is because when you know we will talk about the moisture condition sometime while doing testing that is because you know some of the surface energy absorption of moisture would require after that once the moisture is absorbed you would require less surface energy to produce a fractured surface. So, some of the moisture you know it is a surface tension properties. So, surface now earlier it was between solid and air now it is between solid and water. So, the surface energy change occurs and we know the friction between the particles should also become lesser and therefore, the strength will be lost. So, the moisture condition is also important. So, strength of the pace therefore, is governed by type of cement type of cement type of cement age curing condition and admixture. So, of course, the strength is governed by porosity and pore sizes and which is governed by type of cement age of the pores curing condition any admixture that you are adding degree of hydration is controlled by all of them and they control the porosity also on water cement ratio degree of hydration is controlled as well as water cement ratio governs the porosity and then gel and structure would depend upon all these factors and finally, the moisture condition all this actually governs strength of paced. So, this is your strength of past now strength of past has a role in strength of concrete. So, now we are talking of concrete concrete strength of concrete. So, strength of past you know has got a role in strength of concrete so, it has got a role in strength of concrete. Now, just aggregate is the other one which governs So, what are the aggregate properties? First of all basic quality of the aggregate in terms of its you know in terms of its particles quality of aggregate in terms of particle size its modulus of elasticity right and of course, the surface characteristics that is roughness that we mentioned chemical composition because some chemical composition can give you higher bond and its number volume this is volume concentration here means volume particle size modulus of elasticity this is all we discussed chemical composition and surface characteristics overall quality of the aggregate in terms of its shapes and things like that plaky shapes and so on they have some effect on strength. Now, all this actually governs the paste aggregate bond together with the paste strength paste aggregate bond right. So, paste aggregate bond is controlled by the surface characteristic chemical composition quality etcetera, but also controlled by paste strength. So, paste strength is not the only one this all controls actually the paste aggregate bond and then this together paste strength this together paste aggregate bond together and the paste strength also volume concentration of aggregates that is particle size of aggregate and modulus of elasticity of aggregate they themselves control the strength of concrete because this is a phase aggregate is a phase bond is the other issue aggregate itself is a phase if it has got low modulus of elasticity or lower strength cracks can pass through the aggregate itself. So, therefore, particle size stress concentration volume all this governs actually strength of concrete together with the paste strength and paste aggregate bond. So, this is what we have discussed and this gives diagram gives you the complete idea and then of course, your production factor production factor is important which governs the strength of concrete if you have not done compaction properly strength of concrete may not be appropriate. So, that is the idea these are the ones you know all controls the properties of concrete. So, we looked into paste strength and then into how you know paste strength what governs the paste strength and paste strength itself governs the paste aggregate bond and also the strength of the concrete because in the concrete paste is a phase bond is also a phase you know it is it is so this is what it is, but aggregate is also a phase therefore, aggregate properties also governs the strength of concrete. So, that is all governs the strength of concrete now we can look into the tensile strength of concrete. So, main properties of concrete is main main mechanical properties with which you are concerned is a compressive strength, but then sometime we are also interested in tensile strength of concrete. Let us see when we are interested in tensile strength of concrete you know we will we will rely mostly on its compressive strength very little will rely on its tensile strength. But, how about tensile strength is important for shrinkage shear differential movement etcetera because they can result in cracking. So, unless you write kind of tensile strength it can result in cracking because if you have restrained shrinkage if something is trying to short end and you are not allowing it which can happen in structures. So, if you have restrained shrinkage there will be tensile forces coming in and it can result in you know you may not apply directly the tensile force may not apply may not expect the direct tensile load to be you know resistant by the concrete, but so tensile strength coming because of shrinkage shear is always complementary as you know flexural shear there will be tension and compression I mean shear can be resolved into two component of tension and compression. Then any differential movement some places gone down you know moved relative to the other that results in internal stresses and all this can results in cracking because of the load tensile strength. So, cracking because of cracking occurs because separation of the particle separation of the material and that is because of the load tensile strength alright low set tensile strength. Certain structures for example, then dam and air earthquake excitation pavement slaves and airfield run we are designed on the basis of either direct or fuel flexible strength tensile strength. What are retaining structure you do not want them to crack because you do not want water to penetrate. So, therefore, they are also tensile strength because important pavement slaves tensile strength are important and earthquakes dams under earthquake excitation. This is some places where we rely on the direct tensile strength or flexural strength of concrete. So, tensile strength need to be known, but fortunately it can be related to the compressive strength. It is need to be known, but fortunately we can relate it to the compressive strength. Let us see the failure envelope of concrete under bi axial situation that means, you have applied there is one direction and this is another direction, bi axial situation. So, this side is tension, this is compression, this is tension, this is compression. So, P is applied here P minus is compression. So, thus the failure envelope of concrete this is the failure envelope of concrete that means, this is the boundary. If you have tension alone in one direction more than this it will fail even if this is 0. There is no force on the other direction tensile force. So, it can withstand this much k as is tensile strength either direction individually uniaxial and of course, bi axial situation it can you know, bi axial compression it can withstand lot more. So, it can withstand if I look at compression along only this direction there is no force along this direction, it can withstand around 8 k. Similarly, k here and 8 k there. So, but combinations if you look at it this is the situation for example, in this case it is 3 k is a compression less than a k in tension slightly less than k in tension in one direction, tension in one direction and compression in the other direction is 3 k. So, it can withstand that much whereas, it can withstand here k and k tension in both the direction that is sort of thing. So, this is the failure envelope. So, what we see is compressive strength is around 8 times of tensile strength and therefore, there can be a relationship exist can exist between the tensile strength, in a axial tensile strength and in a axial compressive strength you know. So, one can look into this now we measure tensile strength in two different ways actually we will discuss this in the next lecture. We actually measure them in two different ways. It is of course, difficult to measure direct tensile strength although there are people now there are some attempts to do it but, most commonly we measure by specific method called split tension method split cylinder method and this is splitting. So, which gives you some indication of the direct tensile strength and another ways to measure the tensile strength under bending load where because bending induces strength tension as we know in a simply supported system at the bottom fiber with a load at the top the bottom fiber is under tension. So, the concrete we can test in that manner and that is flexural tensile strength that is usually is higher and that can be related to compressive strength you know dry and wet condition we can see that dry and wet condition much a condition also if it is a strength as you have seen. So, when you do you know we look at a lecture in method of you know test methods then we will come back to split tension test and flexural test. But, we find that the strength in you know varies compressive strength varies I mean tensile strength varies with the compressive strength both split as well as flexural wet and dry condition will discuss it sometime later on because dry condition you can see the strength is low wet condition strength is higher as for a specific reason of shrinkage actually will come to that sometime while split tension the difference is very very little. So, wet and dry the variation is very very little so, but what one can see is that one can relate the cube compressive strength and tensile strength and people have done that. So, basically tens compressive failure is also a tensile failure that is what we have seen in the other other other other other lecture because it is the failure occurs in the transverse direction right. Failure occurs in the transverse tension in transverse direction when applying compressive you know unixial compression failure occurs because of the transverse failure occurs because of this cracks can occur because of this and therefore, they are related. So, compressive strength versus flexural strength one can relate it in this manner one can get curves of this kind one can got get curves of this kind generally lot of scatter but variation will be something of this kind. And similarly, if you measure by split tension you know you get it for split tension you get it something like this the this is the flexural test we will talk about that sometime later. So, generally with various size of aggregate so, you can see typically it will vary in this manner some sort of variation is available and people have tried to empirically relate the tensile strength with this is split this is flexure related to the compressive strength some equations have been developed and several factors of course, will affect this relationship as we have seen in the previous curve as we seen the previous curve you know the type of aggregate the scatters is because of the type of aggregate MSA values and maximum you know MSA values and there could be other cases such as moisture condition etcetera, etcetera many factors should affect this. So, several factors affect the relationship between compressive and tensile strength of aggregate you know it is aggregate type age curing water cement ratio but through empirical formula one can relate them one can relate them through empirical formula for example, F t is equals to k F c to the power n where F is strength can and n are constants. So, n would depend upon what type of strength you are relating right and k would also depend upon what type of strength you are relating for example, for flexural strength k can be different n can be different for split cylinder test k can be different n can be different ok. So, I S 456 of course, it says k equals to 0.7 and n is equals to 0.5 for flexural strength. So, F t is given as 0.7 under root F c k is characteristic strength F c k characteristic not F c but F c k characteristic strength. So, this is largely for design purposes a little bit of conservative value it would be. So, design purposes this is what gives you Indian standard code all other codes have similar sort of formally available. So, then what we have looked into so far we have looked into the role of paste in the compressive strength we looked into role of it is at last time, but then we have right now we have looked into a little bit more the bond strength we have looked into bond strength we have looked into bond strength in the context of aggregate we have looked this into context of aggregate. And what we have seen that paste strength aggregate properties and paste aggregate bond all go under strength of concrete paste strength is self is controlled by type of cement type of you know admixture if you are using and water to cement ratio degree of water to cement ratio as well as age both this actually controls the degree of hydration as well. So, one can get an idea what govern space strength so far we have looked into, but paste aggregate bond is governed by the aggregate property as well last lecture we discussed about paste strength of paste water cement ratio in those factors, but the bond between aggregate and paste is governed also by aggregate properties like surface roughness you know texture essentially. And some cases there can be chemical bonding that is what we have seen and then aggregate properties paste properties and paste aggregate bond all of them together with the production factor governs the strength of the concrete. Then we have lastly looked into the strength of tensile strength you have looked into the tensile strength of concrete and we have said that this can be measured in two ways which you shall see later on test method as we will see in the next lecture, but however both this can be related to the compressive strength because fail after all compressive failure of unixial compression failure of concrete is under transverse tension only. So, there has to be some sort of relationship tensile and compressive strength it could be 8 times compressive strength could be 8 times that we have seen from the failure we have seen from the failure envelope. So, therefore you know one can get a relationship typically empirical relationship has been established large number factors govern this relationship and there of the kind of F t is equals to F some constant into F c to the power n different code uses different values of n and k and also it might differ depending upon type of the cementitious material you are using and so on so forth, but code gives you a conservative value and I s code of course gives you a value of F t is equals to 0.7 under root F c k where F c k is the character 6. So, I think we do this we conclude our this lecture and of you know lecture of 6th module next class we will you know the test factors which governs the strength of the concrete test factors you know both tensile compressive as well as tensile thank you very much. === Lecture 23 Transcript === Welcome to module 6 lecture 3. If you recall, we discussed about factors affecting strength of concrete in the last two lectures of this module. And we also said that it is the you know test condition that has a role on the value or on the estimated strength that we get estimated cube strength or cylinder strength that we get from our test. So, what are the factors related to test condition that affects these test results are you know is what we are going to look at today. So, it is essentially we are looking at what are the factors and how do they how do they factors what are the factors and how do they affect the strength the test condition test related factors that affects the strength you know such factors those will be affecting the strength. So, general outline compressive strength the factors which affect the compressive strength are end condition and capping of the sample or the specimen in a sample of the specimen that I take size and shape and aspect ratio of the specimen rate of loading. And then we will look into some of the aspect related to tensile testing some of the aspect related to tensile strength testing. So, compressive test compressive strength test for compressive strength strength actually what do you do let us take a cube and we apply load from top and bottom to a machine testing machine where this load is applied through hydraulic system and we can also control the rate of loading etcetera etcetera. So, we apply load like this and we define the strength as p max by a that is a simple way of doing that and test condition induces variation in results that is what we are going to see. Of course, the strength therefore, I must have a standard test condition. Now, if you recall some time earlier we talked about that the cube strength that you get actually is not really a measure of the strength that you get in the structure because several factors would be affecting the strength in the structure as well as that obtained from the cube test and they are not same the factors values of those factors or levels of those factors are not same. But then it gives us a relative measure it gives us a relative measure of the materials that has gone in in concrete making. Since the test condition affects my strength I must standardize this test condition and use the same test condition for all the cubes so that I can only compare the materials. So, standard test condition is given in codes in Indian scenario it is given in IS 516 originally framed in 1959 or so, but then it has been reaffirmed possibly sometime in 2009 or so. So, it remains same still remains same. So, what we do we apply load from the top uniformly distributed load on the cube surface and bottom there is an uniformly distributed rate we assume that there is an uniformly distributed reaction from the machine frame or machine plate as we call it we apply the load also through the machine plate and as we apply the reaction comes from the bottom and the cube concrete cube is crushed under those two loads. So, that is how we test cube, but we can test a part of a beam as well we can test the part of a beam as well right we can test the part of a beam as well. So, for example, this is the whole beam this is the whole beam this is the whole beam this is a beam part of a beam after doing flexural strength on the test, test flexural test for flexural strength on a beam we will discuss this test for flexural strength sometime like that. After doing that test the remaining portion unbroken portion actually I can test under compression. So, the load is applied through this and bottom plate is here. So, applied through the top plate and then as we press it goes down and I get some results. Remember this results is not the same thing I S 5 and 16 gives test on portion of a beam is not same as the cube is not same as a you know and these are these two are things are not same they are not same they give you some these gives you some strength the other and gives you some other strength, but anyway that is good enough for our purpose we have because we are relatively comparing. So, compare this results with only the beam results compare cube strength result with only the cube strength result. Now, this is not so popular while cube is very very popular cube is most popular and commonly used this is rarely used actually. Now, n condition in capping end of test specimen shall be truly plain first of all you know this should be truly plain this is what we talked of now this should be truly plain actually this should be truly plain this portion should be truly plain this should be truly plain otherwise the undulation the contact area would reduce and there will be stress concentration you know. So, effective contact area would reduce and apparent strength will reduce. So, therefore, this must be first thing is it must be plain and to do that what we do what we do is we cast surface cast against steel mold are smooth and therefore, it does not require any treatment I will talk about capping a little bit later on, but it does not require any treatment there is very smooth and I put that below the is loading plates what we call loading platens you know. So, I put the this one this stop portion this portion this portion is the this portion you know this portion this portion I am talking of it is that one which is which was in contact with the steel mold during casting and not exposed to here. So, this will remain by and large plane if my molds are standardized and properly made within tolerances then this will remain plain while we can do this for cubes well cylinder actually you cast in this manner cylinder you cast like this you know. So, this surface is always exposed. So, this surface this surface is always this surface is always exposed this surface is always exposed this surface is exposed. So, we apply load however through this so anyway a cylinder scenario we cannot apply, but we have to see that is sufficiently smooth there is no variation right. Now, that is as far as cubes and cylinders large recubes are concerned, but if you cut a core from actual structure sometime we do that we will not be we right now we will not be discussing there, but sometime we cut a core from the cut a core cut a core and from the from the structure. So, this is a core actually is a core cut you know cut core from the structure which we have seen in the beginning first lecture if you remember I actually showed you a core. So, it cut a core from this structure and this core sometime might may have rough surfaces and or length may not be sufficient you know you have to have a specified length depending upon the diameter D. So, all by D. So, there is a minimum L by D which is 1, but supposing I have got slightly less than I might do some sort of a capping here that means put some material put some materials and do capping put some materials and do capping. So, if you do this kind of capping you will see that the results in variation in the strength. So, that is what we are saying. So, end capping results in strength variation right end capping results in strength variation. Now, this variation or the difference that we get is attributed to lateral expansion of capping material and concrete relative you know is both both will be the capping material it can be expanding. So, what you have to doing when you are applying load like when you are applying load like this on this one you are applying load like this material here would be actually expanding material here would be actually expanding. So, if you put a capping material here this will also expand and concrete will also expand. So, it is related to this sort of expansion of this capping material and concrete let us see how it is. So, we will see just see that right now we will see that right now we will see that right now how it affects. Supposing I put different capping material I put different capping material let us say first is one is this is alumina cement first one is alumina cement this one is alumina cement. So, I have made actually cubes or cylinder like this and I am using different capping material here they might be this this might be rough this may not have been smooth etcetera. I mean different words whichever way this is a result of experimental results. So, I am actually doing some capping and capping here put this capping and first material that I am talking of is alumina cement. So, this is alumina cement and second one is gypsum plaster here. Third one is another gypsum plaster fourth one is sulfur with filler sulfur concrete with some filler sulfur you know actually colloidal sulfur E L of sulfur you might have seen it actually melts. So, you put some aggregate into it some filler then it becomes almost concrete when it solidifies. So, this sulfur concrete. So, I can put some sulfur plaster of Paris calcium sulfate 2 H 2 O that we know and P O P plaster of Paris with ordinary Portland cement. So, plaster of Paris is this ordinary Portland cement is here 6 is sulfur 6 is sulfur 5 was same as sulfur with filler and is pure sulfur 6 is right. So, if you have different capping materials same cubes or same cylinder if you look at relative strength if I assume that high alumina cement gives me 100 percent strength for strong concrete it goes on reducing with the capping material it goes on reducing the capping material and for weak concrete the effect is somewhat less in fact, you find slight increase well this is a qualitative statement. I am not doing qualitative statement quantitative statement qualitative statement. So, what we observe is that there is a variation and it depends upon the type of capping that you are using. So, end capping has an effect on you know end condition normally you if you do not have a capping the machine plates are straight way coming in contact with machine plate is straight way coming in contact with top and bottom which are usually steel. So, you have steel platens plates platens they come in contact with the they come in contact with the specimen itself I mean the sample you know specimen itself all right. So, specimen itself so, it that comes in specimen itself all right not sample specimen the sample would be a couple of specimen makes sample. So, it specimen from the sample actually so, specimen Q specimen itself all right. So, this is what is happening machine plates coming and if you put depending upon strong or weak concrete the effect are all different. So, you see it depends both on the strength of the concrete the quality of the concrete as well as you know the effect of the capping material is a function of the strength of concrete again say kind of non linear situation. So, that is what it is and therefore, this is an important issue. So, end condition on capping this is an important issue. Now, what is a mechanism what is a mechanism let us see if I have some diagram. So, some diagram some diagram right now I do not have perhaps so, no problem. So, what what explanation is here let me have use my own diagram right let me use my own diagram. The observation is I mean or let us first use this my diagram and then I will come back to now this is your cube you are applying load like this and we have discussed that my material my material will have a tendency under this compressive uniaxial compressive situation it will have a tendency to move along this direction as well as along this two transverse direction. Now, if tries to tens along move along this direction that means, it finally the failure is because of tension then the movement is important movement of this material along this direction is important. Now, this point the movement of the material is restricted by the friction between the machine plate and the specimen. So, there is a kind of a force acting like this frictional force which will not allow this movement similarly here this is a kind of a frictional force which will not allow it to move along this direction. So, there is a surface but then surface material is in contact with the just but next layer of concrete. So, if there is a force acting and it is trying to contract let us say trying to expand it would also try to take the material below but if it is if there is a force opposing this this also will be opposed somewhat but it would get gradually get reduced gradually get get reduced you know there is some sort of opposition to the movement here also but gradually it will get reduced in a in other words your this forces resisting forces I mean it will it it will get reduced somewhat. So, you do not have really purely uniaxial situation you have a situation where there is some sort of a force acting on to the specimen depending upon you know depending upon this type of specimen or L by D up to some height this there is a force acting like this also some height force acting like this also this will depend upon this is your L and this is your D if I may say this is the D is a dimension of the cube. So, if it is D and D then there is some overlap is there will come to that just so you see there is a opposing force or to the movement horizontal movement or transverse movement is the opposing force to transverse movement both this direction as well as in this direction there will be an opposing force. So, this opposing force actually what you do it would actually you know net effect is a force compressive force acting like this net effect is at this point compressive force acting like this compressive force acting so tension force will be acting normal to the tensile force will be acting normal so it will act like this and here also it will act like this not tension will act like this. So, tensile x like this because compression is along this direction compressive along this direction net force because of the resultant of the frictional resistance and the applied load. So, net compressive force will be along this direction which means there is a tensile force the transverse tensile force because of positive effect will act like this. So, you have a crack in this direction and you have crack in this direction, you have crack in this direction and you have crack in this direction. This is called platen effect, this is called platen effect. Now, supposing I put a material here I put some material here I made put some capping material here. Now, machine plate is not in direct contact with the specimen. Machine plate causes the friction is between this and the friction is between friction is here now, between the machine plate your load is coming from here and friction is somewhere here. So, this material will try to expand in this manner, but would be resisted by the friction. So, it is Poisson's ratio which causes it to deform along the transverse direction, Poisson's ratio along the transverse direction and it is stiffness is an important issue. So, if it moves high moves quite a bit compared to the stiffness resistance to movement. So, stiff it is as a material property for a given force then for different capping you know it supposing I have two different capping their movement along this more it moves it will cause the concrete to move more along this direction. If it is stiff then this direction of strain itself will be low. Therefore, Poisson's effect will be minimal. So, more the Poisson's ratio of this capping material and less the modulus of elasticity of that material it would tend to actually nullify the platen effect more. So, in other words just let me now put it here higher new where new is the Poisson's ratio divided by E modulus of elasticity stiffness more modulus of elasticity you know more modulus of elasticity is then less will be the movement. So, new by E is important if this is less this term is going to be higher and if this is more this term is going to be higher. So, this if this is higher so higher new by E induces higher lateral movement higher lateral movement higher new by E induces higher lateral movement. So, that is what we have understood that is what we have understood I am just raising it out now right again it is you know. So, softer and weak material has higher expansion and their lateral expansion is more then that of concrete. So, softer and weak material has higher expansion and their lateral expansion is more than that of concrete. So, therefore, this will cause if that moves concrete will automatically also move platen effect will get reduced significantly softer and weak material will reduce the higher expansion increases lateral move strain in concrete and crack parallel to the load grows rapidly leading to failure under one load. So, you see a higher so that means, if a higher new by E material as a capping material that is softer and weak material you put it the capping material it will cause it will itself expand and will not restrain the expansion of concrete under the you know postence effect and therefore, concrete vertical cracks you will see possibly crack parallel to the load that is downward load. So, crack will be parallel vertical load vertical cracks and that will failure will progress under that kind of load for strong capping material result is opposite obviously. So, if the new by E is small that means, this material itself has low postence ratio and E is high very stiff therefore, stronger material has this kind of behavior and that would actually restrain and therefore, it would have show a higher strength compared to the one with higher value of new by E because it will restrain. So, the net effect is you know the material is not into expanding the transverse direction there is a restrain to that. So, net effect is it you will require higher load to cause it to no fail. So, this is the effect of end capping as we have seen the end platens of the machine produces same effect a strong capping material. So, the capping you know end platens machine platens because steel is a material it is a strong material and its postence ratio is divided by modulus velocity it is relatively low if there is no capping material. Therefore, plate restricts the movement and increases apparent strength and the degree of restrain depends on friction between plates and the concrete surface. So, that is why everything has to be standardized you see you have to standardize your plate and whether you go to use a capping material or not that has to be standardized normal queue stress we do not apply any capping material. But, varying this capping material we did understand you know why possibly a specimen which has got high L by D fails at low load compared to a specimen which has L by D equals to 1. So, the degree of restrain depends on friction between plates and concrete surface and for very low strain capping material wax let us say if we put wax the difference is quite evident from the cracking pattern. We put wax which is a very low strain it does not restrain because it is very low strain weak material expands quite a lot and therefore, you can find almost particle cracks right something similar for example, rubber or teflon if you use it has got a high strain but low stiffness. So, it allows expansion but does not fail itself and therefore, you will find again the effect of the plates are gone. There is something called brush platens made of platens plates made of brush you know you have brush closes place brush brush platens. So, the use below the plate brush so brush can expand easily it is a brush till brush it just put that it can expand although it will not fail. So, that is it that is you know so that is platen effect basically. So, if you see if you have no effect no capping no restrain practically and if you have high restrain then these are the scenario low restrain high restrain high restrain you will get because as I told you that net compression will be along this direction resultant force. So, transverse tension will act like this and you have something of this kind while if you have low restrain basically you wax or something or teflon or brush platen effect you know brush plat plate then cracks will be vertical because of the failure due to persons effect. So, this aspect is to take into account. So, therefore you know we got if you recall we got failure of the cube like this this is the cube failure if you remember this is what we showed earlier in the beginning cracks will come like this then this is the shape that you get and some cases you go further you might get a shape like this this is the portion which does not get failed right. So, this is a this is the final portion so platen effect act like this due to the platen effect it is you know it is like this. But then restituted effect is limited up to certain distance from the plate as I said it is limited if this is your you know specimen what is important is L by D. So, up to certain portion this is effective this platen effect you know this will act up to certain point right it will act up to certain point does not act full end. So, this act up to certain point right this act up to certain point ok. So, in this direction also it will be there so it will act like this. Now, how much is this distance this distance is sin to be it is related to this D this can be related to this D. So, it is been observed that up to about 3 by 2 you know 3 by 2 maybe 8 6 D 3 by 2 D up to this D the end of the cylinder diameter thus. So, it is actually you know estimated actually up to 8 6 D this effect will be there. So, if this is D 0.86 D this distance will be 0.86 D sorry 8 6 D 0.86 D this side also 0.86 D this side also 0.86 D. So, you have L equals to D which is the case for Q for Q actually there is an overlap of the platen effect because this is 0.5 D and this side 0.5 D. So, it goes up to 0.86 D. So, platen effect practically this effect of restraining effect of the plates works over the whole of the specimen. But, if you have a cylinder with H by D is equals to 2 H by D equals to 2 for cylinder. So, in that case what is happening in that case what is happening in that case what is happening a cylinder H is equals to 2 D at least this is 2 D D the platen effect will finish up to 0.86 D. So, this is 0.86 0.86 D this is 0.86 D. And so on. So, there is some portion there is some portion where you have no platen effect that will expand easily it will expand easily along this direction. So, therefore, we adopt actually H by D equals to 2 and we find the strength is lower strength is lower in case of cylinder strength is lower in case of cylinder. So, that is it strength is lower in case of cylinder strength result G first for specimen H by D lower than 1.7 when we ask a question sometime you know it is lower. But, why it is lower some people say buckling well buckling occurs when H by D is greater than 5. So, it is simply because of platen effect cylinder strength is lower than cube strength right cylinder strength is lower than cube strength effect of H by D ratio decreases with increase in concrete strength as nu by E increases decreases sorry nu by E decreases. So, if you have higher strength concrete E is more nu is nu is you know nu is also relatively nu by E will be higher for higher strength concrete. So, this nu by E increases you know the basically the depending upon this of the concrete itself because expansion of the concrete is important right in weak concrete restaining effect will be more because it wants to expand. But, then if you are having it so this effect would be more and you can see the how the capping material is actually affected it. So, that is why this depending upon the strength of the concrete relative motion of the concrete with respect to the capping material that would differ and that is what it is. So, cylinder then failure of the cylinder you will always see vertical cracks somewhere you might see something of this kind right you might see something of this kind and you might see something of this sort of thing. So, you see cylinder failure pattern is something of this kind cylinder failure pattern is something of this kind all right. So, that is because same this portion there is hardly any platter effect and therefore, it shows vertical failure pattern. People have done some experiment and it has been observed as you increase the H by D ratio high to diameter ratio relative strength if this I am calling 2 I am calling as 1 you know at 2 it is 1 at 2 at 2 it is 1 sorry at 2 it is 1 it is 1 at 2 at 0.5 L by D ratio it is something like this and it also depends upon the strength. For example, higher the strength behavior is somewhere here lower strength behavior is somewhere here. So, this effect you know 1.4 L by D equals to 1 let us say L by D equals to 1 you get about 1 point depending upon the strength you get 1 point some cases might get around 1.3 some 3 5 or something some cases you can get very close to 1 point 2 and so on so forth. So, depending upon the situation depending upon the strength this ratio this is for cube or cylinder having L by D ratio is to 1 cylinder having S. So, some experiment shows how it changes actually. But what is observed is that beyond certain point the variation is very little this variation is little right. So, that is because of the that is because of the because of the L by D ratio is to 1 cylinder having S. So, some experiment shows by D ratio effect. Similarly, if you have know if you just have kind of a situation where you have put in some packing between earlier 1 as L by D ratio related to H by D ratio earlier this was related to H by D ratio we have changed. So, you have said that if the H by D ratio is high platen effect reduces and therefore, strength tends to become similar. Now, if I put some packing same aspects of capping actually first case is no packing second case is 8 millimeter soft boards and this is 2.4 millimeter plastic board. So, in this case there is no effect practically you do not see relative strength almost similar 100 and in case of 1 no packing effect is there. So, packing would effect this packing would change packing would change cause change you know some cases L by D ratio effect could be nullified by putting right kind of packing. But, 1 does not want to do that we want to standardize everything and use the you know use the rest I mean use compare for comparing you know test result for comparing only. So, with less stiff packing effect of H by D vanishes as in the case of plastic board because plastic board has got low modulus of elasticity and high porcelain ratio. So, new by E is now actually large. So, it can deform itself and allow the concrete to expand and therefore, this effect is merely is simply not there you know it is very little maybe. So, this is what L by D ratio cylinder to strength and all that. So, therefore, thus when you are measuring core slayer say if you are measuring core as I said sometime you do testing of core. So, you are measuring the strength of the core and different H by D ratio is there. If you consider this as 1 American society of testing material the factor correction factor for 2 is if it is 2 is 1 correction factor for 1 is 0.91 that means, the cylinder with a L by D ratio equals to 1 would exhibit nearly 90 percent of the strength sorry exhibit sorry not nearly 90 percent exhibit higher strength. So, multiplying factor is 0.91. So, convert the cylinder cube convert this L by D ratio 1 L this is L this is D. So, convert L by D ratio 1 cylinders strength of train for L by D ratio 1 cylinder to L by D ratio 2 what you do you multiply this by 0.91. So, you can see the strength is higher by 1 by 0.91 around 10 11 percent higher according to a steam code I mean this is of course, judgmental. If you see British code this is 1 by 0.92 Indian standard 516.89. So, you know everybody takes somewhat lower value that is for that is for of course, core. Now, ASTM gives you the same thing if I plot it I get ASTM and this is Indian standard 516 same thing even in a curvature form 2.5 above and all that you would find much of a variation above 2 practically there is no variation and that is it. Now, lot of people have actually tried to find out ratio to cylinder ratio of cylinder strength to cube strength right. So, strength of the cylinder to cube strength on this side at what point they are same obviously, it will show scatter large scatter. But typically what you do is you know it would vary upon the strength it varies with the strength higher the strength the ratio is increasing actually relative cylinder to cube strength because we said that the capping and platinum effect all these are function of the strength as well. But what we do is normally in general we use 0.8 as a ratio of cylinder to cube strength. So, specimen shape has got a role capping has got a role therefore, while Indian standard uses cube 15 centimeter of the side slant some other places the use 15 centimeter diameter cylinder their strength would not be same. So, it depends upon specimen type by the ratio and also you have seen what kind of capping that you are using. So, long cracks initiate fracture earlier in a larger specimen therefore, now size is the other issue dimension of the specimen. If the specimen size is large then it fails at law load why because long crack can long crack initiate fracture earlier. So, in a larger specimen you are likely to find out a longer crack or longer fissure right in the beginning right and therefore, in a larger specimen one is likely to find longer crack thus lower strength results. So, this is somewhat something called size effect sort of thing larger the size lesser is the strength experimental data for cylinder exhibit reduction in strength compared to 150 mm specimen for larger diameter. So, if you know one does systematically but then the error is so much in our normal testing the variation capturing the variation is not very easy you have to do lot of test actually. For example, just doing 3 cube of 10 centimeter side length 3 cube of side length 150 mm and 10 meter 3 cube of side length let us say 200 mm. So, 9 cubes you test 3 of each size and find out the mean you may not find the variation because the error in the test otherwise because of all those all the factors that is involved may just simply mask the effect of the size. But if you do large number of test then this effect you do see. So, people have done some testing and they have observed for cylinder and cube size well let us see what are this for cylinder it has been observed that if you have larger diameter if you have diameter increasing along this direction in millimeter diameter in millimeter the relative strength assuming that your you know 100 corresponds to some at 200 I mean 150 sorry 100 corresponds to 150 mm cylinder. So, relative strength if the size is smaller strength is higher size is larger but beyond 500 mm diameter strength does not change because you know the crack sizes are unlikely to increase. So, this is observation for cylinder. So, you can you know that is why size is standardized again cubes of course, people have some results are available say size of side length if it is 70 mm then relative strength is 1.0 100 to 150 mm people have seen that it is 1 200 maybe 0.95 300 point 90. So, you can see the size of the cube is important. So, if you are using 150 mm cube size which we standard to use that cannot be compared with any other size. Now, some of the codes European some of the European codes or euro codes they actually allow you to test different sizes many many many country they allow you to test actual different sizes of cubes. But one thing it is only for comparison purpose and same size supposing I am comparing 100 I am using 100 mm cube then I must be comparing different concrete with 100 mm cube only. Laboratory you know standard of course, standard for quality control and acceptance such that in Indian scenario use 150 mm cube. But in laboratory sometime people might do it 100 mm cube but then 100 mm cube has to be translated to 150 mm cube results is not same. Similarly, cylinder somebody might use 100 by 200 mm diya 200 mm length it is equals 200 or somebody might use 150 and 300 which is standard in many countries. But then comparison will be 100 mm diya 200 mm diya 150 mm diya 200 mm cube. So, that size is important. So, this is the other test factor which is very very important. Then next important is thing is the rate of loading higher loading rate is higher string quickly you load it load is a very faster pace the fracture do not transmit so easily it takes time while you just put a sustained load there will be effect of creep in an extreme case. So, some deformation might occur with time all right. So, you see sustain if you are monotonically increasing at a very slow pace the strength observed will be less compared to if you are doing at a fast rate. So, loading rate is also important and this many people seems to miss it. So, your test specimen cube test specimen use in concrete construction when tested the testing machine must have a mechanism to control the rate right. So, ultimate strain is attained early at a lower rate of loading due to creep that is what we are saying that supposing we assume that strain is where it fades fracture occurs and you know it will occur. So, rate of loading has a you know kind of effect on strength for example, strain rate per second if you put it then measured strength. So, higher strength strain rate strength increases lower strain rate strength decreases. Similarly, loading if you see relative measures relative measures higher rate of loading load per second let us say load applied per seconds or let me put it this way load per second relative values the relative strength increases. So, at higher rate of loading whether it is strain controlled situation or you are controlling the load the rate of load a load a load application because they are not same thing load control and strain control are different load is easily controlled by hydraulic system while a strain control would require you are finally applying actually applying load, but then you want to control the strain. So, you have to measure the strain and there is a feedback loop through which you see that you know the load is changed. So, it requires a kind of controller ok we will not going to that right now, but whatever it is rate of loading is important higher rate of loading tends to show higher strain higher rate of loading tends to show higher strain. So, therefore, what codes have done Indian code uses 14 MPa per minute as a rate for cube and 12 MPa per minute for cylinder. So, basically this is by and large worldwide similar sort of things are used 14 MPa per minute rate of loading is used and this is very important in quality control because the machine must have this capability to control this and that is quite often honest to check this in case of you know acceptance of concrete etcetera. Moisture condition Moist specimen load the compressive strain then try specimen I just mentioned it other day because you know if there is an adsorbed water now what is adsorbed water adsorbed water vapor can be adsorbed that forms actually a layer as you know water is dipole you know H OH. So, center of positive charges here negative charges here this is 105 degree or some such angle you know whatever the angle is. So, this is not 180 issue for surely. So, H here so therefore, it can form a dipole and this water can get attached to the charge solid surfaces in fine in case of very fine particle like clay or cement gel cement hydrate gel there adsorbed water is there we talked of this sometime earlier right in the beginning. So, this adsorbed water causes dilation of cement gel lowering cohesion resulting in lower strain. So, it is adsorbed water if you moisture water adsorbed water is by capillary suction. So, even capillary suction absorbed water the water that goes in that also results in lowering of cohesion because it is get absorbed by surface tension forces. So, change in the surface energy and all that occur and that is results in lower strain. So, thus cubes are to be tested at a standard moisture condition. So, you have a saturated surface dry situation and the code tells you within how much time you should wipe off the surface and then test is and put you know wipe off the surface put it on to the expose for certain period of time and within how much period of time actually should be testing. So, moisture condition is an important issue. So, that is what that is what we have. So, what we have seen for cube first of all we have seen the capping and size I mean aspect ratio also L by D L by D or H by D. Then we have seen rate of loading rate of loading moisture condition size of the specimen. So, all these factors effects are strength therefore, codes standardizes those condition and accept the material the composition the concrete that is produced. So, therefore, concrete that is produced. So, therefore, I can compare relatively the material that has or this composition that has gone into making of the concrete you know the concrete that is produced as a material. So, concrete materials is relative performance in terms of strength can be compared by cube test or similar solenoids. So, let us look at tensile strength how do you measure tensile strength? It is actually difficult to measure tensile strength directly I mean one can use what is called one can use what is called a be cat test something of this kind specimen directly. But gripping this specimen is fairly complicated you have to grip it here and pull you know if there is any horizontal load any moment or anything of that kind coming in that can create problem and just cause it to failure may not be failure is a tensile failure. So, pulling it and all that so, there is some amount of complication involved therefore, this test is not done this test is not a preferred test this test is not a preferred test for concrete tensile strength and direct tensile strength is rarely used also. So, what do you use of course, some time we use but let us see we have better method since we have better method we use that better method or easier method I will say in case of flexure of course, it is not direct tension tension in some part compression in some part all right direct tension is full specimen is under tension in case of flexure full specimen is not under tension only a power you know tensile stresses also varies we will see that. So, this strength tensile strength in failure we test by what is called modulus of rupture test modulus of rupture test modulus of rupture test right we do modulus of rupture test. Then for direct split tension test is done but this itself is an indirect test you know indirectly measure the direct tensile strength of concrete. So, this is called split split test split tension test Brazilian test Brazilian split tension test and so on so forth. In case of modulus of rupture what do you do we have the beam specimen right and then this supported on two rollers. So, this is 3D so, this spacing is same and load is applied to two rollers P by 2 P by 2 so, you apply actually P here generally this is 50 centimeter total 50 centimeter as per IS this is 40. So, 13.3 you apply the load and this is D dash the you know this is some dimension depth this is D this is B and this is D dash usually square 10 by 10. So, D dash is equals to B you can apply sometime but not necessarily you can you know by the principle does not require this. So, loading rollers capable of rotation and inclination in the vertical plane that means, you are only transmitting downward force because they are roller point point loads you are only transmitting point loads. So, in in case this bands you know this is capable of rotation and getting inclined in the vertical plane. So, therefore, this will not apply any other kind of force except for this type of force and these are the supports. So, supporting roller capable of rotation and inclination in the vertical plane same thing. So, it will only give you point loads. So, actually you are trying to put a point load and that is how it is. So, what will happen I will have a bending moment diagram of this form P by 2 P by 2 here L by 3 of course, this from the center L by 6 L by 6 and 3 by L. So, your bending moment here is L by 3 into P by 2 you know. So, this will be bending moment will be simply P by 2 into L by 3 which is equals to P L by 6 and the maximum stress Z value is given as you know is moment of resistance will come out to be P L by B D square because this will be Z the that section modulus is B D cube by 12 and D by 2. So, this will be simply B D square by 6 and therefore, M by Z will be P L by B D square. So, that is the at failure you find out what is the P value at failure and the corresponding F value is called modulus of rupture M O R modulus of rupture of rupture. It is actually a measure of the flexural strength M O M O R modulus of rupture is a flexural strength right. Now, why do we choose this bending moment is constant here simply 0 shear stress you know shear diagram if I look at it it would be something like this or you know. So, there will be no shear stress shear force here there will be no shear force here. So, I am trying to actually minimize the shear stress and only bending moment. So, it is a pure flexure within this zone then also that if it is a single point loading you will have only one point failure may not have occurred within that. So, here you are increasing the chance of failure due to pure flexure by putting 2 point loading. So, no shear force pure flexure and so on so forth. Now, people do of course, if you have different dimensions case 1 is single point loading, case 2 is 2 point loading the variation is there, but I said this is what is standardized 2 point loading has been standardized. Obviously, it will change with the dimension like we did for we said for cubes. You see modulus of rupture value that I am calculating I am assuming the stress diagram is like this you know that P L by B d square that I obtain I assume the stress diagram is linear, but real stress diagram will be something like this. So, you see M r actually over estimates the result a little bit. 2 point loading ensures pure bending without shear in the central 1 third that is what I said and 2 point loading produces maximum moment between the loads thus more area is exposed to maximum bending moment then 1 point loading hence lower apparent modulus of rupture. Calculation of M r assumes strangler stress distribution actual stress distribution is different. So, modulus of rupture is therefore, it over estimates even the flexural strain, but we will see that the other kind of test results that is speed tension test that we will do that we will just discuss gives you lower strain than modulus of rupture, but if you are able to do direct tension that will give you still lower. So, what is speed tension test? So, this is what it is tensile strength modulus of rupture you know this is of course, direct. So, this in linear of course, they are linearly related, but this is always lower you know this is not a line here not 45 degree line this somewhere here. So, when this is 1 this gives you somewhat higher value. So, this direct tensile strength or tensile strength is usually 1. This is how we do split tension test you apply load like this on a cylinder point along the line along the line or I can say something like this sort of load here over a small area P. And if you take the stress at any point that stress can be drawn from theoretical elasticity these stresses are these are available concepts are available and this stress diagram one would look like this where this is your compression this is the tension. So, only top small portion there is a compression compressive load because we are applying compression here we are applying compression here. So, only small portion there is compression rest of the portion it is actually tension. So, it is trying to split along this direction. So, this portion is only tensed compression and you can see is you know the it is because of the shape of it or the kind of you have the load you have applied. So, it is seen that this is only portion where compression is applied most to the portion you apply actually tension trying to split. So, d by 6 d by you know maybe d by 0 to 6 and 12 maybe d by 12 or something d by 12 or somewhere close to that all other places it is actually tension. So, the tensed F t this is F t F t is given as this is F t F t is given as twice p by pi L d where p is the load that you have applied pi L is the length L is this length L is this length L is this length. So, this is L this is del d. So, 2 p by pi L d is a at failure p failure if you take p maximum this will be your tensile strength this will be of tensile strength. So, split tension test gives you you know you can do it on a q also in that case it will be like this you apply p here and the formula F t is equals to twice p by pi L square. This gives you lower strength then modulus of rupture this gives you lower strength then modulus of rupture because in case of modulus of rupture only the bottom fiber is subjected to maximum tension other are not besides that you are actually over estimating you do not take actual stress strain diagram. Split shows lower strength and direct tensile strength will show still lower because in split at least there is some compression portion. Non-informed stress distribution in MOR that is modulus of rupture and split test impedes the propagation of crack thus delay failure therefore, this is the case we have discussed this crash aggregate exhibit better modulus of rupture then rounded aggregate and because of bond of moisture condition also bond. So, bond is very important in this one please split so, crash aggregate with rough surface actually. So, some or other here this shows better modulus of and the undulation will be there in case of crash aggregate rounded aggregate this surfaces they might show split might differ moisture condition also influences now it influences in sorry influences in a different manner moisture condition influences in a different manner how does it influence higher moisture content shows I think I have shown the diagram earlier higher moisture content actually shows higher tensile strength unlike compressive strength why because it minimizes the shrinkage while dry specimen shrinkage comes into picture. So, this is because of shrinkage you know shrinkage this is in this case it is because of shrinkage shrinkage comes into picture. So, in case of dry specimen there is some shrinkage cracks which will always be available and the tensile strength becomes lower both MOR as well as the direct tensile strength. So, moisture condition aggregate type everything affects this and therefore, what we have seen compressive strength the effect of test factor self by d H by d capping size rate of loading and we have see all finally, I would like to say that is a relative measure of the strength of potential mix that is what it is and tensile strength this also varies with the type of measurement modulus of rough surface gives you higher value code of course, uses different one which we have which we will be talking about in the next class sometime you know how the or I think we have talked about this actually the code gives you 0.7 under root of C k you know. So, these are based for relative for use in design. So, there are some conservative value but test conditions how it affects that is what we will see. So, I think we can with this we can close our discussion on this third lecture for the modulus you know module 6. Thank you very much and we will be looking at modulus of elasticity and other mechanical properties of concrete in the fourth lecture of the 6 module. Thanks. === Lecture 24 Transcript === Welcome to module 6 lecture 4. In the last three lectures of this module, we looked into mechanical properties of concrete namely compressive strength and tensile strength. Also we looked into what are the factors which affect these strengths, particularly compressive strength and including the test factors. Now, compressive strength is the most important property of concrete being a material which can withstand more compressive strength as a little material. So, can withstand a lot of compressive forces compared to compressive stress compared to tensile or pull tensile stresses. But then other important mechanical properties are elastic modulus, porcelain stress ratio, fatigue, abrasion resistance and impact resistance. So, today we will be looking into these important properties, these important properties. So, first we look into elastic modulus followed by stress 10 behavior, porcelain stress fatigue, impact and abrasion. So, let us look at relevance of elastic stress strain relationship and elastic modulus and porcelain stress ratio. Stress strain relationship sigma is how we denote stress and epsilon. Structural elastic modulus and porcelain stress ratio are needed to calculate deformation, deflection and you know it is nays or e2 determine also forces sometime in indeterminate structures. So, structural analysis would need this modulus of elasticity particularly and deflection etcetera are dependent on all this. So, these properties are relevant and the stress strain curves for materials is important because in structural design you know they have their relevance. Now, stress strain curves of materials we can classify into four types. For all materials in general course we have left out elastomers, but typically these are the four. So, we will see that concrete is of course non-linear and inelastic or non-elastic material. Now, simple linear and elastic material, linear and elastic material strain versus stress. So, it will follow this stress strain curve during loading and when you unload it it comes back just back to the original with no residual strain remaining. This is non-linear and elastic. So, an elastic material will come back to its original state when load is withdrawn, but this is not linear, it is non-linear and if we follow it up further this is of course, linear but inelastic or non-elastic you know it does not come back. So, there is a residual permanent strain and this is non-linear and non-elastic. So, there is permanent strain it goes like this at some level of stress you go and when you come back it does not close in. So, there is some kind of a hysteresis and it is non-linear, non-elastic and concrete belongs to this. So, concrete belongs to this material concrete cement paste or similar material they belong to this. So, it is actually non-linear as well as inelastic. So, when you release load beyond of course, certain point not right in the beginning, net least one third load if you go on beyond that there will be some permanent strain when you release the load. Well, since it is non-linear we have to define the modulus of concrete since non-linear so it is behavior is something like this and then it follows something like this. So, what you do you define something called initial tangent modulus initial tangent modulus you know this is what it is. So, the tangent if you draw here that is we call as initial tangent modulus, but I can draw tangent anywhere that is called tangent modulus at that particular load, but I can join the origin with this point and I get another modulus the slope of this line and that we call a second modulus. And while returning I can also calculate out the same second modulus from this point the slope of this line slope of this line. So, for concrete modulus can be defined in different way. Initial tangent modulus tangent modulus at any stress or strain level and second modulus again at any stress or strain level in fact, we can have a chord modulus joining between two points you can have a chord modulus, so chord modulus. So, joining between one point and another point. So, that is how we define the elastic modulus for concrete. Now, if you look at stress strain behavior it is non-linear that is what we have shown and this is attributed to something called creep that is the deformation under sustained loading will come to that sometime it is one way of looking at it, but there is something more we will look into. We can measure this under static condition another is under dynamic condition that means static condition means you apply the load monotonynically in steps and then see how the deformation or strain changes. So, stress at steps and strain at a measure corresponding stress and from stress strain curve you can find out the modulus of elasticity. But you see from you know concepts of mechanical wave travelling in solid media we know the velocity in the media is a function of velocity in the media is function of E you know it is a function of E root E over rho actually you know. So, velocity is proportional to E over rho. So, therefore modulus of velocity is city has something to do with this velocity something to do with the mechanical wave or sonic velocity is pulse velocities. So, when wave is travelling through the solid you know there is a compression and rare fraction longitudinal wave travelling through it or any wave travelling through it there are deformation and therefore, the modulus of velocity place a roll, but what kind of modulus of velocity that will be bulk modulus. So, you can relate these two anyway this can relate these two velocity. So, if you have actually obtained velocity in the you know velocity of wave travelling through this medium you can actually estimate modulus of velocity. Now, that is called dynamic modulus. So, dynamic modulus is related to dynamic modulus is related to wave propagation within the material itself right because velocity of wave propagation or characteristics you know wave propagation is related to elastic modulus and one can determine that way. Dynamic modulus because there is no load applied as such in a big way and it actually corresponds to initial time in modulus. So, obviously, this value will be higher than any other modulus because it is non-linear. Now, physically of course, micro cracking of concrete at usual load results in apparently permanent deformation and that is why it gives rise to non-linearity. I mean creep is 1 is about 5 finally. So, micro cracking of concrete at usual load results in apparently permanent deformation giving rise to non-linearity. That means, you know whenever you are actually for example, if I have a compressive specimen applied load like this, applied load like this. Now, if it is sufficient L by d is sufficiently large let us say L by d is sufficiently large L by d is equals to 2 or something of that kind. So, whenever I am applying load remember that we said the cracks will form here. They will be cracking micro cracks will develop because of the tension along this direction. You know you recall we discussed there will be tension along this direction and therefore, micro cracks will develop. Now, after certain period of time supposing we draw the load this you know and this results in deformation along this direction 2. So, reduction in the length micro crack will form and there will be reduction in the length. Now, when you release this load this micro cracks are not going to fill up they remain as permanent features in the material and therefore, it will not go back to its original state. So, once the micro cracks have formed it will not go to its original state. So, there is some kind of this will actually you know manifest themselves this cracks manifest in terms of the deformation permanent deformation. So, therefore, permanent deformation this permanent deformation and also this gives rise to nonlinearity. So, permanent deformation nonlinearity both comes to this because suddenly there is an nonlinearity bits at given stress suddenly there is an increase the moduloseable or stiffness reduces because the cracks has occurred. So, stiffness would reduce and therefore, the material would tend to show lower moduloseable elasticity or lower slope. So, material shows a kind of nonlinearity behavior to start with it is like this to start with it is like this you know it goes like this. But then there is suddenly there are lot of crack formation. So, modulose changes and this if this continuous if this modulose is changing then it will show a kind of nonlinearity behavior and if this cracks do not close then it will show permanent deformation when it is coming back when it is coming back it will show permanent deformation. So, that is the idea that is the basic you know explanation to why it shows nonlinearity behavior. Now, this has been confirmed by test such as acoustic emission and ultrasonic pulse velocity test right. So, micro cracking is generally confirmed by this now let us see let us look at this. So, you see if I look at if I apply load like this if I apply load like this you know if I apply load like this when a specimen is here if I apply load like this Pers inconvenient here if I apply load like this. Now, this is longitudinal strain that means, strain along. This direction that strain along these direction dimension change. So, strain along this direction that is longitudinal strain. Then this is trans bar strain that means, if I measured the strain along this direction that is transfer strain and volumetric strain because volume changes original volume change in volume divided by the original volume. Now volume actually can be a reduction in the volume change because this is reduction this side there is an expansion and net effect initially there is an expansion then there can be a reduction in the volume as such. Now what is acoustic emission? So this is acoustic emission we just mentioned about acoustic emission I mean it before we mentioned that you know you can when you do acoustic emission acoustic emission an ultrasonic pulse velocity confounds micropracking. So what is acoustic emission? We will just quickly look into this for our purpose as much as is required for our purpose. So what is acoustic emission? You see if you take let us say piece of timber or bamboo simply right and try to break it you will find that the sound comes out once it starts cracking once it starts breaking. Now this sound is you know some of the strain energy is converted into acoustic or sound energy you know some of the strain energy is converted. So even you apply strain energy part of the strain energy is converted into surface energy for creating crack but part might go as some sort of acoustic energy because you hear sound. So when you break a timber piece you hear sound. So similarly a bamboo piece you hear sound that is basically a kind of when it cracks. So this crack at the time of cracking there is some sound emission. So what has been observed here? So that is actually acoustic emission in a systematic manner one can actually trace this find it out. So emitted sound as I apply the load as I increase the load. Initially emitted sound is very very less and they go on increasing and the sound starts you know lot more sound. Emitted sound becomes more as the you know loading progresses. In other words permanent deformations or non-linearity is related to all these are related to somewhere X lot of cracking lot of cracking and this is confirmed by ultrasonic pulse also pulse velocity also you know sonic pulse velocity. Now what is pulse velocity in a solid material is more compared to crack material because velocity of sonic or mechanical waves in solid concrete very solid concrete could be of the order of around 4.5 kilometer per second. So they could be of the order you know solid material it could be of the order of around 4.5 kilometer per second 4.5 kilometer per second but in here we know it is around 340 meter per second 340 meter per second. So if you have lot of lot of cracking occurring cracks have occurred then pulse velocity will reduce. So pulse velocity starts reducing initial reduction is relatively slow. Initial reduction is relatively slow but then it starts reducing as soon as lot of crack starts appearing. So therefore the cracking of concrete is confirmed by this kind of testing and therefore if I am trying to plot the stress strain curve you know stress stress increases longitudinal strain. It shows that the non-linearity of the stress strain curve is largely related to micro cracking of concrete. Largivated related to micro cracking of concrete and so is the case is permanent deformation. Permanent deformation is also related to micro cracking. So this is the reason why you get non-linear behavior as well as there is a non-closure of the stress strain curve there is a hysteresis. Now we I mentioned that I can determine it you know I can have static modulus of elasticity or dynamic modulus of elasticity. So we go to do test in two different ways. Static test is done in a monotonic loading but what we do is we actually initially apply several cycles of loading and unloading at one third of the estimated cylinder strength. You know we normally test on cylinder we do test on cylinders. So central one third is used for metering. Central one third is used for metering. This is the portion we use for metering. This portion we use for metering. So you put gauges actually. In good old days we had actually lamps extensometer. It is called lamps extensometer. You know it is called lamps extensometer. Lamps extensometer. That is what we are using. So we will put the actually the gauge there. Gauge you know there. So in the central this will be 300 mm and central 150 mm. So you push to put the gauge here but the deformation is relatively small. So how do you measure this deformation? It has to be amplified in some manner. It was actually amplified optically during those days, earlier days. Today of course you can put in several types of you know you can put in transuser of the kind of strain gauges various kind of sensing devices you can put in to measure measure measure this you know deformation. So several actually deformation measuring devices are there and one cannot strain gauges could be there to measure this. So earlier days lamps extensometer was used. So in any way I am not going into the transuser part of it at the moment it is not necessary but if you are doing a laboratory test then you will be using any of these. This is the old traditional way and then you measure the deformation there. The deformation there within the small range but before doing that what you do is you crush the crush the cylinder to find out to the FCY cylinder failure strength and then load it up to one third of FCY L that is cylinder strength and then unload it. So this cycles are repeated to see that at least first of all the you know there is no no no no there will be no deformation right in the beginning because of plates settling down and things like that number one. Number two this is prior to micro cracking so whatever small cracks that occurs to docker and then after that actually the actual test will be done. So this will reduce down the effect of creep some micro cracking would occur and then hysteresis also will be reduced because of such micro cracking and permanent deformation. So besides that there is another important issue why you do it this way. Actually never the load is never applied one time in a structure you know if for example if you consider the room you are sitting and if it is a reinforced concrete slab on which you are sitting the prior to actually even loading there will be several loading unloading that would occur actually during construction phase or even later on several loading and unloading that occurs. So therefore determining the strength curve after some loading and unloading that is what what you do. We actually do about 15 times loading and unloading you know the codes most of the codes would tell you how to do whatever. So roughly about 15 times I think most of the codes would say 15 cycling 15 times you know loading and unloading and then you measure the actual strain versus stress. So load is then applied monotonically in steps and corresponding steps to corresponding strains are measured and it is plotted it is plotted. So in the testing machine of course stress cannot be reduced to 0. So what you do is we will find out codes modulus finally after this curve is obtained we find out codes modulus as given by this formula codes modulus. So we find out the codes formulas so Fb so we actually find out codes modulus like this you know because this is this is difficult to reduce it to 0. So corresponding to 0.5 MPa this is epsilon this sigma 0.5 MPa and then so Fb so corresponding to minimum stress of 0.5 MPa then up to 1 third Fc 1 third Fc up to 1 third Fc within the you know kind of severe micro cracking prior to severe micro cracking. So Fm minus Fb epsilon a minus epsilon b so you find out this is your epsilon b this is epsilon a and sigma or f or whatever you call it. So you find out a codes modulus according to this or you know so the codes suggest how much where you have to go to test. So Fc 1 third Fc is the elastic limit and often you might find it often you might often you might find it there itself all right. So this is how we determine the static modulus of elasticity. Dynamic modulus of elasticity is determined in this perspective view of the diagram that you see you have a clamp support which should not exceed 120 of the length of the specimen. So this is length of the specimen this length of the specimen this L the length of the specimen right this is L and this should not exceed L by 20. So it should be less than L by 20 there is a clamp of the support. So a specimen rectangular specimen generally rectangular cross section you support it rectangular cross section actually you you know clamp it somewhere in between like this and then you have an exciter you have an exciter that actually imparts acoustic imparts actually acoustic pulses or acoustic you know wave basically there. So there is a longitudinal wave will be traveling along this direction then be traveling along this direction and here there is a pick up which will pick up the you know pulse transmission. So signal that is transmitted through it. So this is a this picks up and as you go on changing the frequency of the sonic wave that is traveling along this direction that is exciting this at time will come at certain frequency there will be resonance occurring right there is a resonance occurring resonance should be occurring when actually this dimension of this one matches with the wavelength I mean some sort of matching with the wavelength of the because the mode would depend upon because it is a central support you are trying to vibrate it and it will be related to length of the it is related to the frequency is related to length of the specimen itself now how it is related it is related like this longitudinal vibration is propagated you know. So you will have vibration along this direction longitudinal vibration so it would be actually it would be actually exciting you know so longitudinal vibration so compression and rare fraction they will be traveling along this direction and from 100 to about 10,000 hertz 100 to 10,000 hertz this range you actually make it to propagate and you will get fundamental resonance frequency when lambda is equals to you know 2 L. So when wavelength is equals to 2 L where L is the length so all lambda is equals L is equals to lambda by 2 at that time resonance should occur. So you find out the frequency at which resonance is occurring and you know V is equals to F lambda. So the frequency of determined therefore lambda is equals to length you know lambda is equals to 2 L lambda is equals to L and V is actually last just I mentioned a few minutes before V is a function of E by rho V is function of E by rho therefore you can actually relate E actually you can relate to V is a function of E by rho and is also equals to F by lambda and lambda is actually a resonant frequency is known lambda is given by this equation L is equals to since you know L so lambda is 2 L in other words you can find out E because F is known L is known and this is this is 2 L L is known this is 2 L you know so you can actually find out as 4 N square L square rho 4 N square N you know 4 N square L square rho into 10 to the power 15 where N is the resonant frequency you know F that I am saying N is the resonant frequency so you determine resonant frequency. So resonant frequency this is lambda you know by 2 so therefore velocity and then velocities and then the rho comes into picture because velocity is under root E by rho so if you want to find out the E it is proportional to V square so rho V square so E is actually E will be proportional to E is proportional to rho V square alright so rho V square and therefore you can find out V is given by N lambda and from that you can find out so therefore knowing the density of the material so you have an assumed density or measured density of the material from that you can find out the modulus velocity. So dynamic modulus can be determined in this manner to I first what you do is you actually impart longitudinal vibration or mechanical wave you know so excite excite through acoustic waves or ultrasonic you know sonic waves from 100 to 10,000 kilohertz because 10 k 100 to 10 k alright so it is actually sound because sound is from 2220 kilohertz so it is not ultrasonic this is kilohertz so this is not ultrasonic this is actually sonic excitation you can provide and then find out from this modulus velocity. So this is how we find out the modulus dynamic modulus velocity and we said that dynamic modulus velocity is initial tangent modulus because no cracks have occurred nothing has occurred in an unquaked specimen is actually we are trying to find out the modulus velocity usually these values are higher. So now let us look at modulus of velocity in terms of the what are the factors that affect so factors affecting modulus velocity first of all you see here is your cement paste this is for cement paste if you see this is for cement paste this is a stress 10 curve of cement paste this is the stress 10 curve of aggregate generally would show something like that and concrete shows a stress 10 behavior of this kind. So aggregate stress 10 behavior is of course fixed you know that is fixed by I mean you have taken the rock and the behavior of the fix cement paste of course is under your control so if you improve this cement paste modulus of velocity concrete modulus of velocity also will increase. So it depends upon both the paste modulus of velocity and modulus of velocity of you know aggregate I mean one can think in terms of the range will of course be something like 1 by E of concrete should be equals to proportion of aggregate P aggregate or proportion of the aggregate divided by E of aggregate plus 1 minus P aggregate that is your paste or proportion of paste divided by E of paste or it might might also be written as P aggregate proportion of aggregate multiplied by E aggregate plus proportion of paste multiplied by E paste. So these two will give you actually an extreme boundary of the you know concrete modulus of elasticity assuming series and parallel model. I am not going to go to a derivation of this but you know this of course this the range this boundary this E c or calculated from this or E c calculated from this they give you two different values. So this gives you we see one let me call it this is E c 2 the this will actually give you the wide range of the modulus of elasticity but at the moment it is more important for us to understand the modulus of elasticity of concrete is a function of modulus of elasticity of the paste and modulus of elasticity of the aggregate. So high modulus aggregate will tend to give you higher modulus elasticity for concrete and high model obviously paste modulus if you improve by increasing the strength then you can actually get higher modulus of for concrete as well. So first thing is this other factors weight specimen exhibit higher modulus why because water has got a water has got water E for E for water for water is more than E for air both of fluid by the way. So weight specimen the pores are saturated with water for weight specimen pores are saturated with water pores are are filled with water water they replace the air so therefore modulus of elasticity is likely to be higher because now it is this pores are filled up with water instead of air modulus of elasticity of aggregate strongly affects the modulus of elasticity of concrete higher modulus aggregate exhibiting higher modulus of concrete volume of fraction of aggregate will also play a role that is what we have seen for our previous formula I said P aggregate that is proportion of aggregate proportion of aggregate and P paste P paste let us say paste which will be equal to 1 minus P aggregate minus moats or whatever that. So basically proportion will play again a big role because whichever bounds you take upper or the lower bound both cases is a function of those two you know the series or parallel model which gives you bounds both cases it will be related to that. Then mostly he can be related to mod F C well compressive strength now he can be related to compressive strength you know it can be related to compressive strength in fact we have seen that modulus of elasticity governs the strength therefore we can argue it out that strength would be strength would also related to modulus of elasticity dynamic modulus is somewhat close to initial tangent modulus therefore it is more than aesthetic and general relationship empirical relationship people have found out for modulus of elasticity is E is a function of K into compute compressive strength to the power n and you know I S 456 2000 for design uses this F C as F C K characteristic strength and n as 0.5. So E is written can be written as 5000 under root F C K and this is for meant for design so this is actually a conservative value in fact it will be something like this you know if I just I just plot it here before this I just plot it here it will be something like this you know if I plot F C in concrete cube strength and E then or under root F C then you get all sorts of scattered results and you can plot a curve so this is what it is trying to do linear curve or some people put it as some m C to the power n maybe 0.6 or whatever values are and one can because this this you know scatters are there now code would use a value of modulus of elasticity the code you know the actual values will be there and the relationship that code tend to use is somewhere there conservative value of E it takes lower value of E because effects of creep long term behavior several other things comes into picture so code stakes this sort of stand actually actual values could differ now since this is you know under root F C I said it can be F C to the power something else so different codes may use different one but IS 456 of course uses E is equals to 5000 under root F C K so you know the line is somewhere the slope is 5000 and under root F C K that is what it use somewhere down there because it takes long time behavior and other things into account and therefore try to use a conservative value so that is it that is related to what code uses and it can be related to composite strain now let us look at the now stress strain curve if you look at stress strain curve at a constant strain rate now last class last lecture if you remember we talked of constant rate of loading now you can do test by constant loading rate of loading that means you apply load at a particular pace 14 MPa per second right so you apply load at a constant rate and we have seen rate of loading actually changes the behavior the you know like behavior changes so supposing I apply now I can apply in terms of strain at certain micro strain per second some strain rate so if I apply load at fixed strain rate and I told you also that is difficult to apply this you need a machine which is capable of applying the servo controlled you know it is capable of applying the maintaining the strain rate at a fixed rate whenever required and that would require a control or a servo control system and so on so forth so if you are applying load at a constant rate you will find that depending upon normal weight you know normal weight concrete behaves in this manner while lightweight concrete shows this kind of behavior because you are able to now since strain rate is there so this portion of the current curve becomes available and this behavior is similar in compression as well as in flexion compression behavior in flexure so you find some sort of behavior like this where this is the E max or rather F max or sigma max maximum stress and corresponding to this we call as epsilon 0 that is the strain at maximum strain at maximum stress strain at maximum for lightweight this would be the maximum stress sigma max and epsilon 0 would be this much so epsilon 0 and sigma max these are the two ones and you see this kind of a behavior so people have tried to fit it approximate equations to this empirical equations to this and this empirical equations that have you know representing this the simplest there may be many more complex relationship but one of the simplest relationship is of this form where E is the initial tangent modulus and you know which is twice sigma max divided by epsilon 0 and sigma is the stress at any point epsilon is the strain at any point epsilon 0 is the strain at maximum stress so epsilon 0 is strain at the maximum stress so this sort of formula is available through which you can define the stress strain curve and there are complex formulae also available so this was stress strain curve of concrete now we actually if you I just before I go to this in flexural design therefore one should be using this sort of curve in compression compression you know so this is remember flexural design flexural stress strain curve given in the code stress strain curve given in the code would be something like this you know stress stress stress strain curve of concrete if you recollect this is strain in flexural you know if it is a beam section of a beam if I am looking at a section of a beam this is a steel reinforcement this is a concrete anyway so stress strain curve we will like this stress versus strain curve if you have seen idealized stress strain curve it will be 0.002 here and 0.0035 stress strain curve and this is actually you know Fc or whatever you call it the stress maximum failure stress now this is an idealized stress strain curve actually idealized stress strain curve idealized stress strain curve of concrete in fact a stress strain curve of concrete should look like should look like something of this kind you know some stress strain curve of concrete will look like let me draw is a red color stress strain curve of concrete will look like this all right maximum stress and here now this is idealized stress strain curve beyond that you assume is as if it is straight line so actual stress strain curve of concrete will like this and this is important in flexural design so the the measured stress strain curve that we have seen you know measured stress strain curve actual stress strain curve observed as we have seen this is idealized into this sort of a straight line curve and of course certain factors are applied to bring down the load as well that I am not discussing at the moment so this importance of the stress strain curve is here because in flexural design you got to use this so idealized curve is something of this kind this is arrived from this real behavior this is arrived from this real behavior so there is the importance of the stress strain curve now let us to get next property which is potentiary ratio this is important to find out lateral deformation when you have applied a longitudinal stress right in the axial situation and so on so therefore if you apply load when you apply load you know you can see this is compressive loading this is tensile the strains are here and this is compressive stress so what happens is this is a longitudinal strain this is the volumetric strain that is what we talked about earlier that you know when we talked of ultrasound pulse velocity and acoustic emission and this is the lateral strain which is in the opposite direction it is in the tensile direction so mu is defined as lateral by longitudinal strain so this is lateral by longitudinal strain mu is defined by this actually so from this if you try to calculate out the mean you know ratio of for example this divided by this ratio you know this divided by this ratio all right all let us say at 400 strain of longitudinal strain corresponding to this is maybe whatever the value is and similarly you know so you can you can you can actually find out mu values now mu values if we calculate out in this manner n and plot we will see that it is roughly around 0.2 it is roughly around 0.2 up to about 70 percent of the load for two different concrete good old days people conducted experiments and follow but beyond that point actually it starts increasing it starts increasing can go close to about 0.3 0.4 or so on so with the you know like if you stress stress to strength ratio so when before failure was inflation increases and we understand this because a lot of micro cracking would have occurred lot of micro cracking would have occurred and that would have caused lateral strain to expand you know increase at a faster rate then the longitudinal strain and this is manifested here also this is manifested in this diagram also suddenly there is a lateral strain increasing not you know here it was increasing in slow manner but it was increase increase started increase in a faster manner while this is increases although although there is a faster increase here I mean you know this is this is not really is almost close to linear sort of situation slight variations are there but this increases at a very fast rate this increases at a fast rate but this increases still at a faster rate and this we can understand from the physical scenario because micro cracking in the would would result in lot of transverse deformation longitudinal deformation also would be there but lateral deformation will increase significantly because of the micro cracking so beyond 70 percent of the load actually your persons ratio increases significantly and you know up to its constant almost constant up to 70 percent of the strength 70 percent of the strength 70 percent of the strength generally it varies in the range of 0.15 to 0.20 the sort see determined from static modulus step test but you can determine dynamically persons ratio also from ultrasonic pulse velocity test from fundamental or you know sonic velocity test from fundamental resonant frequency of longitudinal vibration of concrete beam similar test that we did for modulus of elasticity now how do we determine this how do we determine this actually because the bulk modulus you know it is related to bulk modulus so this is the relationship between you know this is involved in the velocity equation the Young's modulus is related to the bulk modulus in this manner when we use the persons ratio so velocity frequency length and it is related to modulus of you know persons ratio is related to that so this is the velocity pulse velocity resonant frequency beam length and persons ratio from that one can find out so from dynamic testing also you can find out persons ratio and generally dynamic modulus again gives you higher value of persons ratio because you know higher value of persons ratio is usually 0.22.24 and higher the strength of concrete persons ratio is lower higher the strength of concrete persons ratios lower so that is related to persons ratio now let us look at another mechanical properties called fatigue you know fatigue is related to reversal of stresses and you can understand the importance of this one in many structures the load that is applied in most of the structure the imposed load that is actually quasi static but that we do not call it fatigue you know like because even in a building where you are sitting let us say right now if it is on the first floor or you know in the higher floor other than ground floor the slab that you are actually sitting on or your chairs are the load you are coming and then you are going out so there is a kind of stresses it is quasi static actually what happens is by and large we assume that to be static because major load will come from the permanent fixtures such as furniture and things like that the imposed load human contribution is would be relatively less so we assume it to be practically in a static so fatigue is not there but supposing it is a bridge or assume a structure in marine environment where waves comes and hits here waves comes and hits you know waves comes and hits so it is actually under kind of a reversal of stresses were be occurring. Bridges vehicle load comes inleom Sara Miguel's encouragement Com addition to carre makes a deck and then it moves bridge deck and then it moves. So therefore this is the reversal of stresses they are reversal of stresses you know onto the deck so therefore this reversal of stresses is related to what is called fatigue strain reversal of stresses related to fatigue strength. So, let us see and in fact, the load one any structure or any structural element can carry under reversal of stresses is much lower. Then the load it can carry in static condition. So, fatigue is related to repeated loading. Under repeated loading, under repeated loading materials fail at load lower than static strength. The fuller failure load being lower with number of repetition and it is a fatigue failure. A simple example is given supposing I have a wire, small wire and I try to pull it, it will I can never break it you know binding wire which are used for binding the steel in concrete, while casting concrete. But if I try to bend it in this manner that means bend it in this manner, bend it in this manner you know reverse the stress there is a reversal of stresses. So, you bend first you bend it in this manner then bend in the reverse direction. So, first you bend in this manner then reverse direction you go on doing this after some time it will be. So, repeated loading you can you know it it fails at much lower load much lower load and that is basically much lower load and that is basically a fatigue failure. Therefore, fatigue failure occurs at much lower load. So, the mechanism you know that is what is a you know that is what we define as fatigue and let us see how what happens in case of concrete. Now, steel has an interesting behavior we define something called endurance limit. What happens is as you go on number of repetition you know if you apply a load say load which is 50 percent of the strength and then apply reverse the stresses maybe bring it to zero some reversal bring it to zero take it to 100 percent. Number of number of number of I mean one thing the amplitude you know or the maximum stress positive and the negative or maximum reversal range range of the stress range in which it is reversing let us say we keep it fixed. Now, after certain period of time you will find that it fails. Now, if you if you load the load if you load the range in which you are operating then it will take longer number more number of more number of cycles. So, the number of cycles is a function of number of cycles is a functional level of the stress you know reversal where you are reversal of the stresses is occurring. Now, endurance limit is defined in this manner it is much better to define this and they come back to this. If you look at this diagram on this axis number of cycles drawn in log scale because 10 to the power 2 etcetera in log scale and ratio of the fatigue strength to short term static strength fatigue strength to short term static strength. So, actually if you are operating at you know fatigue strength you will find that in case of steel this is mild steel intention you do reversal of stresses, but beyond 10 to the power 7 cycle or some such cycles slightly above 10 to the power 6 cycles and 7 cycles you know the endurance the fatigue the load at which reversal this is occurring at 0.4 or so 0.4 or so close to 0.4. So, close to 0.4. So, around you know like 250 mpa is a yield strength of mild steel if endurance limit is around 100 mpa close to 100 mpa. So, that means, if you apply less than you know 100 mpa and do stress reversal actually it is not going to fail. Now, endurance limit is defined therefore, endurance limit is defined as fixed endurance limit that is repetition beyond which the fatigue strength remains constant. So, what is fatigue strength? Fatigue strength is the number of repetition or the strength which you know it can withstand at certain number of repetition. So, it is related to both repetition and the level of the strength. Now, endurance limit is that level of the strength beyond which actually lower than that strength it can withstand large number of repetitions you know because fatigue strength becomes almost constant. Now, concrete does not have a fixed endurance limit concrete does not have any fixed endurance limit concrete does not have any fixed endurance limit in tension concrete in tension it shows continuously if you the you know the first fatigue strength will go on reducing as you increase the number of cycles. So, here also concrete in compression same thing. So, therefore, how do I define this strength there is no endurance limit how do I define this enduring limit. So, this you know steel is advantageous in that sense from usefulness point of view I mean or let us say a design calculation point of view or understanding point of view because you have got a fixed endurance limit. So, therefore, if you know it is likely to come under cyclic load you assume that it can it can withstand around that endurance limit is a you know is which it which you will be of which you can use in design in case of concrete you cannot do that because it will go on reducing. So, what we do is we take the fatigue strength corresponding to 10 to the power 6 cycles as the fatigue compressive strength. Similarly, in this case 10 to the power 6 tensile fatigue tensile strength. So, fatigue compressive strength and tensile strength are defined with respect to 10 to the power 6 cycles because it will go on reducing for steel of course, you can use the endurance limit. So, it will go on reducing it number of cycles increase number of cycles. So, this is how we define now in concrete two types of fatigue failure is distinguished the one you see the sustained load near the static strength under increasing load causes failure. So, it is static fatigue or creep fracture now concrete shows creep at ordinary temperature that means, if you put a load will discuss this in subsequent module that means, if you keep the load constant and over the time period over the period of time you will find the deformation is increasing and it can have a failure also depending upon the situation. So, under sustained load concrete exhibits kind of deformation and that is related to phenomenon of creep. So, if you have sustained load near the static strength now fatigue is also nearly sustained because you are reversing the stresses and near the static strength. So, you increase the load and it causes the failure and this is related to static fatigue or creep rupture you know. So, if you are reversing the stresses close to the static strength then there can failure can be by creep rupture because sustained load is sustained very static load is sustained plus minus something is always occurring you know plus minus something is occurring. So, this sustained load can result in creep rupture because load is sustained very close to the static strength repeated citing loading is of course, other case where you are operating at much lower level, but then it fails because repeatedly you have done you know reversal of stresses are being done over a large number of cycles. So, these are the two situations and we can see the behavior in this manner. If you look at this diagram if you look at this diagram usually you know in this case what you are doing you are sustaining the load for 50 days. Three minutes stress 10 rapid loading stress 10 curve is like this this excess is strength this is stress rapid loading stress 10 curve is like this and here it might fail. If you finish it within three minutes it will show you failure like this. I do not have a here I am only controlling the rate of loading in terms of load per you know per unit time not in times of strain controlled situation. So, what will happen very rapid load loading no you will the micro cracks will form, but suddenly there will be sudden brittle failure at some higher load. So, it fails somewhere there, but if you are loading under let us say three minute failure up to failure which could be the case in case of static monotonic loading. So, it will fail somewhere there no not much deformation or such thing it will not show it will show this if you have a strain controlled situation. So, a kind of what you call strain softening would occur you know as a strain increases strength it can load it can carry is lower. So, if you you know if you go on increasing this is monot normal normal stress strain diagram, but if it is three days this is this is you know this is about three days you take if you three days if you take then you find that keep the load for three days. So, it is 80 percent of the static load it will actually 80 percent of the static load it will fail keep the load for three days it might fail somewhere 80 percent. I mean this is a national thing one cannot take it for all the time granted the values might differ from test to test and if you keep it for 50 days it is actually fail at somewhere there. So, depending upon this is a 20 minutes three minutes two days three days and 50 days. So, increasing the test duration then which means that my rate of loading I am decreasing rate of loading I am decreasing and at lower rate of loading we have seen that it fails earlier. So, 50 days same load you are applying in 50 days you find that the load carrying capacity is much less. So, I can actually have a kind of a envelope right. So, you can call it static fatigue failure envelope static fatigue failure envelope because this is related to micro tracking or creep B a b a and so on. So, very close to the load quickly if you load it it fails at high load you take a for a longer period of time it will actually fail after certain period of time because it is sustained for 50 days. So, it will actually fail. So, this so you know this is related to static fatigue failure. So, close to this one if you take you know if you do reversal for 50 days it will fail. So, if you do reversal somewhere here if you do lot of reversal the time frame it will be related to this actually failure would occur even though you not gone to too much of a cycle for example, for zero cycle this situations for zero cycle cycle. So, even you have got too much of cycle it will still fail. So, this is actually related to static failure static fatigue failure you know. So, or creep rupture as we are calling it creep rupture right and this is again strain versus stress curve. So, limit of strain after approximately 30 years. So, if I look at static rupture curve is here maximum strain after 30 years this envelope gives you 50 days will look into. So, 0.6 of the strength 60 percent of the strength if you load it to after 30 years deformation will be somewhere here you know after 30 years deformation will be somewhere here of course, it will not fail. But, if you put it at 80 percent after 30 years it will actually fail after 30 years actually it will fail. So, this is it and this is the usual short term strength which is about 3 minutes or so. So, 0.3 there is a 30 percent of the strength it will actually after 30 years deformation will increase, but it will still not fail. So, it fails up to something like 80 percent of the static strength over 30 after 30 years and so, but if you have something more than that it will fail. So, this is how you know this is related to this fatigue and if you do reversal of stresses one cycle the behavior is like this C 1000 and first. So, this hysteresis area reduces significantly hysteresis area reduces significantly and then this area would increase. So, what we will do is you know the fatigue we have introduction to fatigue I have given to you right now and you can see that after long period of time because of the because after long cycling number of number of you know cycling causes more micro cracks to appear. So, therefore, this increases in the beginning there is a reduction, but under long cycling actually more micro cracks form under fatigue loading because there will be fictional and heat generation as it happens or whatever mechanisms are there. So, fatigue causes failure in this manner. We have something called modified good men's diagram. Here this diagram helps us in finding out what is the stress level or reversal of stress concrete can withstand for example, this curve you know this is a minimum compressive stress line this is a minimum tensile stress line. Now, uniaxial compression if you are operating at 40 percent of the strength level or let us say 20 percent 10 percent of the stress level you can do reversal up to this and come back in compression mode only. So, failure would occur at 10 to the power 6 cycles and if you are applying let us say tensile stresses you can go up to 20 percent of the tensile stress 30 percent of the tensile strength and reversal can occur from 10 percent of the compression to 30 percent of the tensile. If this is in compress uniaxial tension and compression this is in flexure and if you are doing purely tensile. So, at 10 percent of the tensile load you can go up to this and come back. So, modified good men's diagram to find out what level of stress reversal you can do what level of stress reversal you can do right at what level of static strength static stress level at 10 percent of the stress level you can reverse the stresses given from this diagram. See if it is compressive stress if it is tensile stress one can determine from this diagram. So, modified good men's diagram can be used to find out what level of stress stress is a range of stress you can use. Impact strength is again can be related to compressive strength and it depends strongly upon aggregate type. Lower for lower water stored concrete and lower MSE improves impact strength and that is shown by this diagram different types of aggregate. This is the number of actually impacts actually it can take the way it is measured depending upon compressive strength. So, both impact and both impact strength as well as you know abrasion they are function of compressive strength and impact is loading at a very high load you know high rate very first rate. So, rate of loading is very very high impact is related to that. One is again related to compressive strength you know as you are rubbing how much now how many what kind of depends upon different types of test actually you can rub it and find out percentage of material generated and this is also related to compressive strength. So, bond to reinforcement again for plane bars and deform bars related to compressive strength. So, bond strength you know so bond by pull out test one can find out. So, what we will find is all these tests are all these strengths are related to compressive strength bond fatigue not sorry bond impact and abrasion resistance these are all related to compressive strength. Essentially higher the compressive strength of concrete all other properties can be related to that and they improve. So, higher strength means better impact resistance better abrasion and better you know better abrasion better impact resistance or impact strength. So, all properties actually higher modulus of elasticity. So, I think we have discussed in this one elastic modulus portions ratio and fatigue and impact with this this model module module will complete. Thank you very much and next seventh module will look into creep and tricky thanks. === Lecture 25 Transcript === Welcome to module 7. In module 6 we looked into the strength properties or related strength related properties of concrete and is in this module module 7 we shall be looking into creep and shrinkage of concrete other two other important properties you know or other behavior of concrete. And in the first lecture we will start with creep and outline of this lecture is first we will talk about or rather we will introduce creep there something called relaxation we will also talk about that mechanism of creep as much as possible. Effect of various factors aggregate modulus velocity temperature etcetera and last we will look into part of the prediction which would continue to the next lecture as well. So let us see what is creep. Now you know in material science creep is the tendency of the solid or if any solid material to move slowly or deform permanently under the influence of stresses you know. So basically it has a you know most many materials have tendency to move slowly or deform permanently under influence of stress. Now metal executes this under certain conditions polymers also exhibit this and of course concrete does. Therefore it what it means is that it occurs due to long term exposure to stress and obviously there will be below the strength because you know it will not fail. So below that there will be deformation long term if you expose them to long term stress that means stress you have and you keep it maintain the stress it would show deformation move slowly or deform permanently. So therefore that is what is creep. Creep occurs in metals polymers and concrete creep of concrete is different then of course others you know creep of concrete creep of concrete creep of concrete is different than others. Mechanisms are different because the materials themselves are quite different. So let us see supposing I have a concrete and I apply stress at sometimes time T 0 has shown here this axis is stress this axis is H and put it to some value of sigma 0 the stress level and maintain the stress constant therefore sustained loading you know kind of sustained stress right. So expose it continuously continuous exposure to a stress let us see what happens sustained stress as we have applied then at this you know same time T 0 the strain would be elastic strain because instantaneously there will be elastic strain due to this. So there will be some elastic strain because I have applied the stress. So initial elastic strain will be given by this sigma 0 divided by modulus of elasticity of the material and as the time progresses you find there is some sort of deformation occurring and if you consider the time T you know when I have sustained the loading as we have seen we have sustained the loading T and beyond. So at point T you find some additional deformation under this constant or additional strain under the constant sigma 0 has been observed sigma 0 you have not changed but the time you find there are additional deformation additional strain and therefore the creep at this point will be defined as strain at E T which is the sum total of this at T it is sum total of E 0 plus the creeps. So therefore E T minus E 0 that is what is creep strain after time T minus T 0. So that is what is creep concrete exhibits this behavior many other material does but concrete does that is what is of our interest at the moment. So that is what it is. So this resulted in strain, sustained stress resulted strain we find that there are two component instant in years elastic strain and with time there will be some more strain which is of course a symptotic to simeline and the difference between these two we call as creeps strain or creeps simply. If you look at the stress strain diagram you can see if you look at the stress strain diagram right epsilon T stress is sigma 0 same stress is sigma 0. So instantaneous at E 0 is this much so this is my you know initial elastic strain stress strain so this is the stress this is the strain as I increase my strain stress it reach to this strain and let me keep it there do not increase it further as it is shown here but the what will happen after seven days of loading you will find there is some increase and further increase at any time you will find the strain is increased further at E T. So therefore creep is E T minus E 0 so this is E T minus E 0 that is the creep. So some days and seven days under load 28 days under load 100 days under load so at any time after T minus T 0 under load stress strain behavior will change in other words effective modulus has also changed effective modulus has also changed. So if I am considering at some later time I find that the actually you know for example if this is my stress level instantaneous will be this much and instantaneous will be this much and this will be the creep this is this will be the creep. So instantaneous is this much this will be the creep if I consider if I consider this stress level this is the instant instantaneous this is the creep level this is the creep strain. So at any point of time any level of stress this occurs below the failures below the strength level and you find there is always creep so that is what is creep we have defined we define creep like this right. Now a related aspect is relaxation to understand relaxation let us consider this you know pre stress concrete element an element of concrete just hypothetical element of concrete something like this just an element of concrete and I have you know put a pre stressing bar there. So I have put a pre stressing bar it is stressed tensioned pretension and then I have just you know so pre stressing bar this is what I have done so I have just pretension it and this will result in a compression in the concrete this will result in a compression in the concrete you know through this bar there will be resultant compression in the concrete. So concrete will get compressed and therefore some elastic deformation will occur so it reach reach to this level this is the after the elastic deformation it would have you know it would have actually shortened. Now if I allow it allow this continuously for a long period of time actually I will find some deformation which I have not shown here which I have not shown here you know finally over a long period of time I might end up getting further release of you know further compression of this whole thing if I have just kept this material in the long run. So this will be my creep this will be simply creep this will be simply creep this will be simply creep but then that is what we have explained earlier now let us look at relaxation then okay so the creep was something like this now what I do what I do now what I do now take this same after elastic deformation after elastic deformation take this specimen and then provide some restrain to this do not allow it to shrink as I saying you know due to creep you would have gone to this deformation this level but I decided that I will restrain it and will not allow it to go to this level. So what will happen net effect would be because it is you know after creep it is dimension should have been somewhere here but I have restrained it I have restrained it this restrain means I am effectively applying a tension I have you know this restrain means I am applying a kind of tension and this tension neutralizes the compression. So the original compression which I have provided through pre stressing is actually get reduced it will get relaxed and this is called relaxation this is called relaxation this is called relaxation this is called relaxation so therefore if I diagrammatically try to look at it this is my age and then at t 0 I have provided sigma 0 like this before an elastic strain is like this but now instead of allowing it to deform further or the strain to increase what I have done I have restrained it so as I restrained it the stress will get neutralized by the kind of a tension that comes in because I have restrained it it is natural position would have been somewhat different so it you know this as we said then we are kind of since it is restrained then we are kind of tension which will actually the neutralize this sigma 0 value and therefore there is a reduction in the stress and this is what we call as relaxation. So relaxation since the creep varies with time relaxation will also vary with time and since creep was you know it was something of this kind creep was something of this kind relaxation will be in the opposite direction the source here is the stress not the strain here is the stress stress get reduced and relaxation at any age it will be given at sigma 0 minus sigma t so this is your sigma t this is your sigma t this is your sigma t so this is sigma t so sigma 0 minus sigma t. So you see this if it is restrained specimen creep gets actually reduced and through this just concrete element that I try to show you actually what I am implying is that this is very important in just concrete we will just discuss about that sometime later on where creep is important very important certain you know type of structure so where in the situations where creep is important so this is what is relaxation so far we have defined and we have also defined what is called relaxation what is called relaxation now less if I withdraw what happens if I withdraw the stress if I withdraw this stress you know this was my strain original and I withdraw the stress right so time since application of the load so this is your t and I withdraw this stress now what I find is the strain it actually comes down it comes down you know it is it comes down so this is but then it does not come back to the 0 level you know I have applied stress this is the elastic strain this is the elastic strain at sigma 0 elastic strain then this is the creep strain and then I just withdraw on the load completely so it comes back so this is actually instantaneous recovery kind of some of the elastic strain will be recovered but then it does not come back to the original state it stops here only so this is creep recovery which time some amount of recovery occurs this is called creep recovery so my residual deformation is here residual deformation is here so there is creep recovery there is residual deformation still remaining and which it does not come back to 0 so there is a residual deformation and recovery will have two component one is instantaneous recovery as soon as I remove the load you know somewhat like elastic strain so instantaneous recovery of the strain but after that gradual decrease you know gradual recovery of the strain will occur and that we call as creep recovery now you can see that this is in two state if it is stored dry and it is stored wet if it is stored dry and if it is stored wet in wet condition of course creep is somewhat less it is stored wet completely it is less actually and then creep recovery is but the behavior as far as further you know after unloading the behavior is almost similar to whether you stored it dry or stored it wet so this is creep recovery so we have what you have seen we have seen so far what is creep relaxation related phenomena and how the creep recovery occurs. So we can proceed further we can proceed further and by proceeding further we can look into mechanism of creep so we can proceed further and then we can look into mechanism of creep now what is mechanism of creep well actually the problem is except mechanism of creep is still unclear it is not well understood as yet there of course some kind of theoretical modeling being attempted but there is lot of debate on it you know there are debates available on it okay so at the moment exact mechanism of creep of concrete is not not clear or creep in cement paste is not clear but it is one thing understood that it is related to the gel and gel water you know it is related to gel and gel system you know capillary you know the pore system of the concrete so gel pores related to gel pores generally it is related to adsorb or interlayer water generally it is related to adsorb or interlayer water all right and one thing has been observed that concrete after removal of all evaporable water exhibits little creep exhibits little creep exhibits little creep you know exhibits little creep basically if you remove all water but then it might confuse you a little bit because I said creep in wet situation you know if it is fully saturated completely wet situation if you keep it there will be no movement of water actually but if you have removed all the evaporable water and then you know then try to study the creep it shows that the creep is relatively less so therefore it has something to do with those evaporable water or the water it is present as I said earlier that it occurs at all stress levels within the service stress range that means before failure and it has been observed that it is linearly dependent on the stress when the pore water content is constant. So if you are not allowing it to dry or anything of that kind seeing the pore water content is constant then it is linearly related to the stress level you know when pore water content is constant so it occurs at all stress level so there is something to do with the pore water level that is what we are understanding you know if you remove water then you do not get creep really it does not exhibit creep so therefore it is related to adsorbed or interlayer or you know water present in the cement hydrate system that is that can be understood when drying occurs I mean from saturated see one issue is one case is you have dried it and then studying the creep completely dry but if you are looking at during the drying process drying creep occurs when water moves out of course shrinkage also occurs simultaneously it is very difficult to separate out shrinkage from creep because many case both are related to water movement and the gel water gets involved in both the cases so it is difficult to actually separate them out especially when you are studying the drying creep and internal of water internal movement of water to empty pores in seal specimen causes creep so in sealed specimen movement of water to empty pores causes creep see you can understand there are some sort of there are the statement I am making it is not it does not straight away get into the mechanism straight forward there are more complexities involved and the understanding is not yet clear certain observations are one can least a huge number of observations that has been seen in laboratory but generally it is attributed to movement of water and the you know adsorbed water and so on so forth basically it is a calcium silicate hydrates HHS of hardened Portland cement and that that is where it originates that is where you know this that is where it is it originates in case of dried or when you have removed the water that is what has been said that creep is caused by slip due to bond rupture along the bond along with bond restoration at adjacent site when water is removed. So when you remove the water CHS has got vendor walls kind of bond and this rupture of this bonds rupture of this bonds causing actually some sort of further deformation and then of course the bonds restores else bonds gets restored and so movement of water from one place to the other actually causes from gel to some other place from some gel to some other place causes rupture of some of the bond which are associated with the water actually the vendor walls kind of bond that we talked of in case of CHS gel you know it is across those interlayer water that is what we mentioned the beginning when you remove the water there come some kind of slip edges can occur due to bond rupture but then water moves into some other else and they are the bond actually restores. So these are some kind of ideas that has been put forward but one has to remember the cement paste or concrete you know I am talking of cement based concrete. Hydration process is continuous it does not occur instantaneously and it goes on occurring. So this is what is actually you can say aging you know the material changes with time and in any case you have large specific surface of the gel and these ones have some roles to claim creep these ones have some roles to claim creep. So continuous hydration process the change that occurs the aging of concrete and of course large specific surface associated with the gel the water getting absorbed there and this is this have all some role to play in creep. So concrete undergoes actually gradual changes in response to stress and environment because hydration is also occurring and if you have put in some stress there is an interaction with the stress and the changes that is occurring and it will also depend upon the environment relative humidity and so on so forth. Thus it is actually extremely complex thermomechanical behavior and you know this exhibits extremely complex thermomechanical behavior and creep is no exception. So that is why it is so difficult to actually predict but one thing we have understood from our discussion so far that is related to the gel water and its movement gel water in its movement right maybe related to porosity and so on so forth. So as we see we will see the factors affecting we will have some idea but exact mechanisms are still not very very clear. So now we can look into factors influencing creep let us see what are the factors that influence the creep. First of all modulus of elasticity of aggregate we will see more of it but we can understand you know because the deformation deformation of the concrete if you are looking it it would be affected by modulus of elasticity to the overall material and in the overall material aggregate modulus of elasticity plays a role. Therefore modulus of elasticity of aggregate is an important one water cement ratio essentially governs the porosity and post structure of cement based material and therefore water cement ratio who loves you know is please is a factor that influences the creep. Curing condition the environmental condition whether it is fully saturated or what it is the water movement is you know finally it is water movement therefore curing condition and also it is a complex interaction of hydration process which continues over a long period of time. So therefore curing condition becomes important relative humidity environmental condition we just mentioned before and volume to surface area ratio is important because depending upon volume to surface area ratio evaporation rate you know the movement of water outside the specimen or outside the element would be governed by volume to surface area ratio. The slump is the flow of the concrete the concrete characteristics and fine to total aggregate and air content all these are the factors. So these are the factors we will see how do they affect and how one can then we will look into how one can use this for predicting creep for predicting creep. So this is the these are the factors let us see individually some one of them how do they affect aggregate modulus of elasticity. This is an important part and you find that as the modulus of elasticity of aggregate increases the creep reduces the creep actually you know relative creep reduces. So higher modulus of elasticity these are all in GPA let us say something like 100 GPA or 60 GPA you know 60 GPA or 100 GPA. So 60 GPA 40 GPA and relative modulus so very little is high you know space sort of I mean very little. So as the modulus of elasticity increases creep so creep will decrease. So this is somewhere is a red sandstone this is green sandstone somewhere there marble, river gravel, granite and crushed quartz, basalt and so on so forth. So as you increase as the modulus of elasticity increases creep reduces. So higher modulus reduces strains creep we can understand this very easily actually creep means more deformation but deformation but the if it is a higher modulus stiffness of the aggregate is more it is not going to deform. So it will not allow creep to occur it will restrain the creep somewhat it will restrain the creep somewhat because you know the deformation would be restrained by higher modulus aggregate. Higher aggregate content of course will also result in lesser creep it is related because aggregate does not creep it is the cement paste which shows exhibit you know which is responsible for creep of concrete. Therefore more the aggregate content lesser will be the creep this we can see in this diagram more the aggregate content more the aggregate content lesser will be the creep you see volumetric content of the aggregate person. So this is 100 percent here 0 percent here so it increases along this direction and creep in micro strain sort of so some of them are for dry specimen the rounded one and these are for welds welds specimen and this is creeping creep from the age one day and you can see as you have lesser aggregate more creep more aggregate less creep. So if you have more aggregate less creep and this is understandable because aggregate do not creep so it will not contribute to creep while paste will do and although it is not really related to modulus of elasticity but it is related to the aggregate content finally affecting the stiffness of the system because more aggregate means more stiff the system I mean more you know more will be governed stiffness will be governed by the aggregate modulus. The next factor is water cement ratio and age of loading if you look at water cement ratio and relative creep somewhere around 0.65 I am saying creep is let us say one or dividing all creep by that is at around 0.65 or so and what we find is a higher water cement ratio more creep lower water cement ratio less creep higher water cement ratio more creep lower water cement ratio less creep I mean this is you know related to porosity right this is largely related to porosity. So what it says if I have age of loading increases creep should decrease so age of application of the load if it is 7 days if this is 1 then at 100 days this will be something like 60 percent of that so relative creep is on this axis and therefore we can understand more water cement ratio means more pores. So if scope for water to move from water fields pores all pores are unlikely to be saturated even if you have some water content unless it is fully saturated that is a separate situation maybe you know we did not see for the wet specimen the creep will be very less that is what we have seen in the earlier when we said dry specimen wet specimen it is not fully dried if the pore water was there but at the same time wet specimen fully you know it is fully saturated situation the movement of the water will be relatively less and if it is fully dried there will be some creep but creep gets much less because you know because it can continue because of slips that we talked about between gel water you know gel particle this coelastic behavior of the gel system that may still cause sums but it is relatively less. Any way coming back to here back here that higher water cement ratio means more pores and it is unlikely to be fully saturated so some pores will be empty some will be filled more that that phenomena is likely to be more here. So water can move from field spaces to unfilled spaces while in low water cement ratio lesser the overall pores and you know this kind of movements will be restricted besides through gel pore it has to move only because capillary segmentation and all would occur so movements also would be relatively difficult. Now this same thing follows as hydration progresses obviously the gel structure or segmentation occurs and gel structure become very solid so if you apply load later you are likely to find less creep if you apply load later you are finally likely to find you know you are applying load now in a system which is more matured so therefore you are likely to find less creep relative creep as shown here as shown here as shown here what about relative humidity well it is a percentage relative humidity 50 percent 70 percent 100 percent. So you see if you have 50 percent the creep is more 100 percent it is relatively less creep absolute values in micro strain and you can see that it is 50 percent it is more and this is basically time t since loading 5 years 28 days so time since loading so after loading 28 days after loading 10 days after loading and so on so forth. So if you after loading you find the 10 years now relative humidity higher the relative humidity less again same movement of water relative humidity means gel should be more or less saturated so movement of water from gel pores to other gel pores that should be relatively less right and saturated in kinds of 100 percent relative humidity so gel pores will be all saturated so therefore adsorbed water movement will be relatively less adsorbed water movement will be relatively less capillary pores hold adsorbed water suction capillary suction the gel pores hold adsorbed water you know vapor also can come and get adsorbed the surface because it has got an on mass surface area that is what we said that it has got very high specific surface earlier we mentioned that so therefore relative humidity higher relative humidity lesser will be the creep volume to surface area ratio if I look at volume to surface area ratio you know so ratio of 30 year creep to this side is 30 year creep to elastic strain 30 year creep strain to elastic strain you know and volume to surface area ratio. So what you are looking at is epsilon 30 years on the y axis epsilon 30 years by 30 years by epsilon 0 elastic strain so this ratio you know so the creep would be more if this is of course drying concrete this side is sealed concrete so if you see so basically you know design infinite creep at infinity divided by this so 365 days at the age now volume to surface area ratio more less is the creep volume to surface area ratio greater higher higher V to surface area ratio means less creep why why so well it is through this surface it is through this surface through the surface evaporation occurs so higher volume or if I say S by V more surface area per unit volume means more evaporation possible drying is possible so moisture movement is more moisture movement is possible so in other words you know less V by S is more creep so high V S by V more creep more creep so low V by S higher creep so that's what it is so you see that you know lower lower values you get high lower V by S you get higher creep lower V by S one gets higher creep lower V by S you get higher creep and this reduces so because of the evaporation losses the water movement gets restricted etcetera and therefore you know the so loss of water reduces is V by S ratio hence lower creep loss of water reduces with V by S ratio hence lower creep so this is the explanation for this one V by S now what about temperature temperature also affects the creep supposing I have 60 degree centigrade cured at the test temperature this is a relative creep so higher the temperature there is some some sort of a peak and beyond that there is a reduction but if you cure at 21 degree centigrade and heat to the test temperature that is 40 degree centigrade one year one week before loading and then do the loading you find that creep actually increases with the temperature so what you are doing you actually cured at 21 degree centigrade right and heated to test temperature so what you do then you heat to 40 degree centigrade or 60 degree centigrade and keep that sustain loading under the same condition so now what happens is there is an increase in the creep so you have 21 degree centigrade cured and this situation but here cured and tested at this temperature so you do curing at 40 or 60 degree centigrade now the problem is you are doing sliders curing at 80 degree centigrade curing will not be you know the pore structure will not be uniform pore structure will not be uniform pore structure will not be uniform right and beyond that when you are curing at 100 degree centigrade practically evaporable water that is all gone so most of the evaporable water will vanish actually so this will not help beyond that you know of course you have non-informed structure at the same time the most of the evaporable water will vanish as you go close to 100 most of good lot and therefore creep tends to reduce so that is what we are saying when you are actually removing some of the evaporable water and during curing because you are curing at 90 degree say here you are curing at 90 degree centigrade and then applying the load so curing at 90 degree centigrade and then applying the load so this at this point the water has evaporated but up to this point still there is an increase in the creep but this creep is less than this because the some water has moved out some water has moved out right some water has moved out so creep increases with temperature that of course you have seen but then it has something to do with the movement of water and that is what explains the situation for example this is again temperature concrete previously dried up to 105 degree centigrade silt specimen and this is unsilt concrete so you have dried it goes to a very low level you know previously dried to 105 degree centigrade right and the relative creep is this so dried concrete dried concrete relatively but if you have dried to 500 degree centigrade or so 300 degree centigrade unsilt concrete then obviously creep seems to be more creep seems to be more and this is also the case you know so relative creep tends to increase at 0, 0, 275 degree centigrade and higher so higher temperature it is related to you know since it is related to moisture movement this is what is happening. Silt concrete at low temperature shows low temperature you know at low temperature silt concrete at lower temperature and dried concrete obviously creep more so this is at silt concrete at lower temperature this one so this is what it shows the behavior minus 25, 0, 25 and so on. So if you silt the moisture still retain moisture still retain so if you increase the temperature actually little bit tendency to show high creep. So with all these factors one can think in terms of predicting the creeps roughly 25% of 20 years creep occurs in 2 weeks so as you have seen creep behavior we have seen that it is elastic strain and then from this it follows like this so you know initial rate is pretty high so 25% of 20 years creep occurs in 2 weeks 50% occurs in 3 months and 75% in 1 year. So most of the creep seems to occur within the first 1 year 75% of 20 years so it is asymptotic behavior you know later on therefore creep is creep with time you know gradually creep with time creep will actually reduce down. Now there are guidelines through which we can actually estimate creep approximate expression will be given like this creep at any time T after 28 days let us say let me call it as C T and the approximate expression is that if I know C 28 then for silt and saturated concrete will be 0.5 T to the power 0.2 for drying concrete this will be given as 6.6.19 plus 2.15 L and T to the power 1 by 2.64 so this is some empirical equation as T increases because it is T increases creep reduces creep you know creep I mean time for drying concrete the relationship is like this so as T increases creep reduces T increases creep reduces or rate of creep actually reduces that is what it shows you know rate of creep actually reduces so as T increases rate of creep reduces it is asymptotic curve and that is why it is like this. So as T increases this is 0.2 this is 0.2 T to the power 0.2 so you know if you differentiate this you will get 0.2 T to the power 0.2 minus 1 and you can see that as T tends to infinity it will tend to go to a constant value it will tend to go to a constant value. So whatever it is basically they will like to you know this will like to one it is asymptotic so the formulas are fitted in this manner. But better way would be better way would be to predict through some of the guideline some like some using some guideline like SEI 2009 R method. So this is method appropriate to normal weight concrete under constant and momentum conditions. So approximately one can actually predict but remember these are for design purpose or estimation purposes for practical uses. So they would like to it should be should be for practical purposes. Actually environment may not be as constant as thought but still this could be applied this could be you know one can use this for estimation. So let us define something called specific creep let us define something called specific creep. Specific creep at time C T 0 where T is the time at which I am trying to find out the specific creep T 0 is the time of application of the load is a creep due to unit stress applied at T 0. So if you apply sigma equals to is equals to 1 then the creep that you get C at time T and T 0 is the time when you applied that I call a specific creep. So specific creep at any time is the creep at that time due to unit load due to unit stress sorry not unit load unit stress applied at T 0 right due to unit stress applied at T 0. Then another terminology creep coefficient which is denoted by phi is the ratio of specific creep to initial elastic strain. So phi T 0 is nothing but C T 0 divided by epsilon 0. So this is basically related to elastic strain right. So creep coefficient is the ratio of specific creep. So this is for unit load this is for unit load and this is the initial elastic strain. So elastic strain if you want to find out the creep specific load multiplied by epsilon 0 will give you the specific creep. So creep coefficient multiplied by elastic strain will give me specific creep right it will give me specific creep. It will give me specific creep. ultimate creep coefficient is a long term creep coefficient and we can be related to creep coefficient at any time. So creep coefficient we have defined as sorry creep coefficient we have defined as creep coefficient, we have defined phi T T 0, we have defined as c T T 0 divided by epsilon 0, right. But ultimate creep coefficient that is the long term, this is the long term. So, long term this ratio of creep coefficient can be related to creep coefficient at any time. So, this can be phi infinity t 0 is the time of application load can be related to can be related to this, that is what we are saying, that is what is all right. In other words phi t t 0 at any time is t t 0 to the power 0.6. So, this are relationship between this and this. So, this is related by an empirical formula and that is the I see a guideline. It is actually t minus t 0 t 0 is the time of application of the load t is the time at which you are finding out the creep coefficient and t minus t 0 to the power 0.6, 10 t minus t to the 0.6, t minus t to the power 0 to the power 0.6 into phi infinity if you have applied the load at t 0, if you have applied the load at t 0, right. So, it is if you have applied the load at t 0, ultimate creep coefficient is further related to various factors. So, this I can relate to various factor. If I can relate this to various factor, I can find out this, I can find out this and multiply this by epsilon 0, epsilon 0 into phi t t 0, that gives me c t t 0. So, creep at any time I can find out first of all I must find out this, this will be known to me first find out this and to find out this, this can be found out and this is related to various factors, this is related to various factors, this is related to various factors. So, let see how they are related phi t 0 is given by 2.35 K 1 K 2 K 3 K 4 K 5 K 6 some factors, factor 6 factors, some fixed 6 factors simply phi this is K 1 K 2 K 3 K 4 K 5 K 6. So, there are 6 factors to which you can relate. Now, remember this factors are what we have seen earlier like aggregate modulus, aggregate content, then water cement ratio, volume to surface area ratio and so on so forth. So, this we can estimate in this manner, all right. This is very this of course, is complexity of mathematics involved here, but one can one may not be able to remember this, but using a procedure simply because these are all empirical equations, these are all empirical equations. K 1 is given as 1.25 t 0 to the power minus 1 1 8 for moisture and age of loading greater than 7 days. So, these guidelines are given or it is equals to or it is equals to 1.13 t 0 to the power 0.095 for steam curing and age of loading 1 to 3 days. These are more practical situation. See age of loading would be most of the time more than 7 days, it is where you would be less than 7 days, right because desaturating etcetera etcetera after that even construction load most of them will come, but if you are doing steam curing then load can come fairly early because steam curing is done to attain high earlier strength so that load can be applied easily. So, this again a kind of empirical or guideline available. So, K 1 was what was the K 1, it is for moisture curing and the type of curing. K 1 is a factor related to curing condition. K 1 is a factor related to curing condition. So, K 1 curing condition curing condition, K 2 is related to relative humidity, K 2 is related to relative humidity, K 2 is related to relative humidity and there is more about it, but I think I have picked up only one portion because if one is interested in calculating for various condition, various relative humidity situation one may go back to ACI, ACI you know the document that I mentioned just now, ACI, ACI guideline 209 are, but a part of it I am just mentioning here for example, for example, I am mentioning here related to relative humidity, if it is more than 40 percent of equation is given like this, where H stands for relative humidity in percentage. So, H stands for relative humidity in percentage. K 3 depends on the member volume to surface area ratio, you know we seen that this is a factor and you have a table part of the table is reproduced here, part of the table it is not really full table, volume to surface area ratio 12.5 it is 1.3, 25 it is 1.1, 37.5 it is 100. Now, we have seen that more surface area means more creep likely to be. So, lesser this value is you know this lesser this value more surface area means lesser this value. So, lesser this value creep will be more lesser this value creep will be more and this is so b by s all in millimeter b in millimeter surface area also in millimeters volume to surface area ratio will be millimeter, a part of the table actually I have just reproduced you know table is much wider. So, one can use this and we have understood why this actually, why this occurs because the drying of moisture movement can be easier when you have more surface area and therefore, when you have more surface area this value is less this factor is higher. You know remember that we said it is 2.35 K 1, K 2, K 3 etcetera, etcetera K 6. So, phi infinity phi infinity at T 0 this is given as you know ultimate creep coefficient is a function of K 1, K 2, K 3. So, higher the values of K 1, K 2, K 3 more will be the ultimate creep coefficient in another words more will be the creep. Then we have K 3 which we said that was related to v by s and v by s you know K 3 is K 3, K 2 was related to relative humidity, K 3 was related to this. So, values of K 3 is were given and some cases it is related to related to the period of creep also given by this kind of a formula for up to 37.5 this table was good enough up to 37.5 this table was good enough and 12.5 to 37.5 for other values for other values this formalize also given T is more than 1 year T is less than 1 year 2 formalize given and v by s greater than 95. So, greater than 37, 37.5 95 mm you know those values are this values are given. Now, K 4 is related to slump of the concrete K 4 is related to slump of the concrete in other words compaction and you know flowability of concrete or compaction of concrete. So, or possibly related to water content. So, higher water content is higher slump as is slump and K 4 is related to slump of the concrete which is in terms of higher water content. Then K 4 was related to slump K 3. So, what we seen just repeat it for just repeat it K 1 relates to K 1 relates to K 1 relates to there a very first factor relates to curing condition. The second factor relates to relative humidity, third factor relates to volume to surface area ratio, fourth factor relates to slump of the concrete and the fifth one relates to the aggregate content. So, A f is the fine aggregate content and A is the total aggregate. So, relatively this ratio is more of the coarse aggregate content less will be the creep that is what we have seen. So, because it will actually restrain and therefore, K 5 is related to the proportion of coarse aggregate in the system. K 6 is related to air content, K 6 is related to air content, higher air content high will be possibility of more you know water movement. So, therefore, A is the air content, so higher air content K 6 is higher. So, what we see is that it all depends upon all these factors and then we define a term comes. So, what we have seen K 1 curing condition, environmental condition I can say K 2 relative humidity again environmental condition, K 3 volume to surface area ratio, K 4 slump K 5 fine to coarse aggregate and K 6 is air content. So, these are the factors to which is related to then phi what we have we have got is phi, we got actually phi that is ultimate creep coefficient which I can multiply which I can multiply by a multiplying factor which is a function of t minus t 0 and I can get is the creep coefficient at any time. And if I know the creep coefficient at any time I can find out actually creep at any time multiplying by elastic strain for unit stress for unit stress. Creep function phi is elastic strain plus creep deformation. So, creep function is elastic strain plus creep deformation. So, under unit stress, so under unit stress 1 divided by this is epsilon 0 under unit stress and this is creep. Now, this also can be related to unit stress because we said you know phi t t 0 was nothing but epsilon 0, epsilon 0 multiplied by c is equals to c t t 0. So, therefore, this can be related this is epsilon 0 is nothing but this is nothing but 1 divided by e. So, this can also we let me just rewrite this, let me just rewrite this separately, let me just rewrite this separately, let me just rewrite this separately. What we said was creep function is phi and it is given as 1 by this is c plus. So, this I can write as 1 for unit stress all is elastic strain plus creep for unit stress strain. So, epsilon t 0 unit, so this is the elastic strain plus this can be written as phi t t 0 multiplied by 1 divided by e 0. So, therefore, you see that this is 1, what is this? This is basically c can be written as epsilon 0 multiplied by phi t by t 0 and epsilon 0 is what 1 over e 0. So, I can just replace it like this. So, therefore, I can write this whole thing the creep function as 1 by e t 0 1 plus phi plus you know this e t 0 can be taken common modulus of elasticity at that time and this is what it is 1 plus creep. So, this is for unit stress creep function is for unit stress and that is how I can estimate. So, e is related to cylinder strength, this e is can be related to cylinder strength because we know it is 5000 I mean cube strength was 5000 under root of c k. So, e is related to cylinder strength by a c i formula and one can obtain this. So, that is how we can predict the creep function which is for unit stress at any time t. So, that is prediction of creep we will have more of the prediction of creep in the next class. In this class therefore, what we have understood is this lecture we have understood this creep and relaxation. We have looked into mechanisms and we have looked into factors affecting creep and some part of the prediction rest of the prediction, some more of the prediction we will look into in the next class and then we will look into measurements and so on. Now, as far as prediction is concerned just I would like to mention one more thing. At the moment we have come up to creep function through which I can predict this creep for unit stress. So, with this we conclude our this lecture. Thank you very much. === Lecture 26 Transcript === recollect in module 7 lecture 1, we discussed about creep of concrete and at the end we talked about prediction of creep by ACI formula. We will just quickly recap that, but today we will be looking into some issues related to creep and some related to shrinkage. So, we will look into creep prediction of creep what has been remaining. Also we will look into where creep is you know relevance of creep in civil engineering, structural engineering and then we look into measurement of creep and lastly some introduction to shrinkage. So, to start with we look into the British method of predicting creep and if you remember we talked about the ACI method, ACI method in the last lecture and where we said that you know the phi ultimate you know ultimate infinity can be related to you know some factors 2.35, 2.35, 2.35, 2.35, K1, K2, K3, several factors. Today we will look into the other method. Today we will look into another method. So, that is the British method and in this one what you do is first E is determined from equation and ultimate creep from figure. So, E is given as E T 0 that is at any time, modulus of elasticity is any time is important because you do not know at whatever time modulus of elasticity is not known. So, it is actually related to modulus of elasticity at 28 days and then this ratio of the cube strength of at the time to 28 days cube strength. So, this ratio is important. So, this is related to so, 0.4 and plus 0.6 into this ratio. In other words when this is high this ratio is more than it will be more than 1. So, 60 percent weight is to this one multiplied by E 28 and this gets increased actually and 40 percent directly as thus much. So, it is this relationship is of this form. Now, E 28 is found out from this relationship, E 28 is found out from this relationship 20 plus 0.2. So, it is assumed a linear relationship with respect to cube strength simply with the intercept being 20. So, it is put in as a linear relationship and this strength ratios depends upon age it is 0.747 day 1.174 90 days and 1.254 one year. So, this from this first you find out the E corresponding to at that time. Now, once you have done that then you can use this diagram. Now, if you look at this diagram in this diagram you have got relative humidity percentage here R H R H percentage here. Then this is the ultimate creep coefficient ultimate creep coefficient is given along this direction and this is for three conditions actually three conditions of volume to surface area ratio. So, these are 1 2 and 3. So, three conditions of volume to surface area ratio and millimeter on millimeter or in bracket it will be in inch. So, whatever it is the volume to surface area ratio is like this. So, up to certain value, up to certain value, up to certain value, up to certain value below 100 mm of below 100 mm of volume to surface area ratio. This values this values will be ultimate creep coefficient values can be obtained. So, below 100 mm values volume to surface area ratio, below 100 mm values and this is the relative humidity. So, average relative humidity indoor, this is average relative humidity condition. This one is outdoor in united kingdom and this is 1, 3, 7, 28, 90, 365 age. So, these are the ages. So, if you have age say for example, this is a kind of no-mogram. Let us say I have got 60 percent relative humidity, 60 percent is a relative humidity and I am interested in the ultimate creep coefficient in 90 days. Then I come to this curve and then my volume to surface area ratio is let us say it is between you know between I mean below 200 above 100, but below 200 and this is more than 200. Let us 150 mm. So, my V by S is 150 just hypothetically, R H is 60 percent and I am interested in ultimate creep coefficient, ultimate creep coefficient, creep coefficient at 90 days. So, what will I do? 60 percent relative humidity go to 90 days, go to 90 days, go to 90 days, go to 90 days come along this direction and it is 150. So, it is somewhere in between. So, it will be given as 1.6. So, it will be given in 1.6 ultimate creep coefficient will be given as 1.6. So, basically you can find out using this no-mogram the values of ultimate creep coefficient, values of ultimate creep coefficient. So, values of ultimate creep coefficient can be found out using this kind of a no-mogram which is there depending upon the relative humidity H. So, the factor that has been considered here, if you see it is the H volume to surface area ratio and relative humidity, relative humidity of exposure. So, exposure condition, volume to surface area ratio and H, these are the main factor that was considered in this one to find out the ultimate creep coefficients. So, if you know ultimate creep coefficient, then you can find out ultimate creep function which we have seen in the last lecture. The formula is same, it is the same because the definitions are same right, definitions are same, there is no variation in the definition to S i method or other method. So, we find out creep function from creep coefficient, we find out creep function from creep coefficient. So, ultimate creep coefficient can be related to creep coefficient at any age, same similar kind of formula, same basic concept that was there and then it can be related to creep function as we have done in the last lecture. So, you can predict by using either of the method, but obviously, with modern days, the excel sheets available and all that, it is fairly easy to use the factors K 1, K 2, K 3, etcetera, etcetera and simply multiply them by 2.35 to find out the ultimate creep coefficient which can be finally related to the creep function in the similar manner as we have done in the last class. So, that is related to prediction of creep and now it is less look into measurement of creep. Now, measurement of creep, the standard that is mean, the only standard perhaps is available is ASTMC 512 and what it suggests is that you stack cylinders, 4, 5 of them and they are subjected to sustained loading and strains are measured, strains are measured, I mean it will look something like this. Like you have a loading frame, the loading frame is here. So, that will have some sort of you know some sort of jack plates, you know loading frame, it will have some sort of jack plates lower and the upper one and through which you apply actually load, on to these are the concrete cylinders, concrete cylinders and there is a plug in between gap, right I mean, but the main issue is this is almost schematic and there is a spring below, there is a spring below. So, you know you apply actually load, there is a spring below, there is a load of series load apply in series to set of cylinders and the concrete plug at the top and you know there is plug between the cylinder and the jack etcetera, etcetera and also between the spring and the concrete which I am not shown here and then you apply load like this and keep this load sustained. Now, the deformation that will occur will be absorbed by the spring will deform by this amount. So, there is no chance of load getting reduced because spring will provide the kind of kind of reaction that is required. Now, what do you measure? You put actually strain gauges, you put strain gauge or any varieties of gauges actually has been suggested, you know you can have varieties of gauges, gauges here in the gauges in the central portion, I mean you can actually put in gauges, strain gauges or you know very all all kind of gauges are possible, you can insert them, put it into the surface or even embed them. So, all possibilities are given in the code and if you look at that it is all available and that is how creep is measured, that is how creep is measured. Now, this is costly, it is large and expensive especially when you are trying to do a number of such cylinders because it is a loading frame. So, it is expensive, expensive but possibly the you know the only standard method available for measurement of creep. Now, you have to also do one thing, you see this there will be other factors which would be affecting the creep. So, therefore, you have to have controlled specimen which will be subjected to similar environmental and such other condition and the strains there also change in strains there also will be measured. So, the comparison will eliminate out you know all the other other factors effect of other factors. So, difference between the strains will be attributed to creep actually under the sustained loading, under the sustained loading. So, this is one of the setup that has been used for researcher they have tried to actually adopt some much simpler way to subject you know that that would mean that you know if you look at this particular dimension of this one this will be very large you know at least something like two meters two you know one one point five two meters the specimens etcetera etcetera plus a loading frame the loading frame through which you can apply constant load. So, this is large specimen and you know large setup and costly also simpler way is to subject two concentric cylinders right to a constant load applied manually through plates by tightening nuts just we will see that. So, earlier one you have a jack through this actually we apply the load and maintain that load right and you can test a number of cylinders in one go you know. So, stack them and put them together to study. Now, in this one when you have so number of samples becomes large in particular case in fact, minimum is suggested in the code again that you must cast at least five six of them one or two as control rest all for testing and so on so forth. So, this is relatively large but as I said earlier that is mostly this is the only one possibly only type of code that is available guidelines available. So, the best way to do is to that only but simpler way is to subject the concentric cylinder to a constant load applied manually through plates by tightening nuts as we shall see. Then load is measured using calibrated steel tube dynamometer at 0.2 to 3 20 to 30 percent of the strength and then strain can be used measured using gauge like demake gauges you know demake gauges etcetera etcetera. But loss of load may take place because there is no spring support system like that is there earlier for example, it will look like these are the concrete, concrete cylinders this two are the concrete cylinder this one and this one as a concrete cylinders these are four rods there be two of them are seeing other two will be somewhere there and other two will be somewhere there you know. So, four rods are there and there are plates here there are plates here and this can be there are nuts here which can be tightened. So, this is of course, the dynamometer and this are the nuts these are the nuts actually which you can tighten to actually stress this this is fixed here. So, this is the dynamometer there is a ball joint point joint. So, as you stress this as you tighten up this so, this will be stressed. So, it is stressed to around 0.2 to 3 percent of the you know 20 to 30 percent of the strength and then then then allow the you know allow the deformation to occur and you can measure this deformation again by putting demake gauges here the demake gauges here will of dynamometer is essentially for measuring the force the load or the stress you know finding out the stress that will come into. So, this is there are demake gauges you know is pre calibrated this very much pre calibrated. So, it is deformation if you know from that you can find out what will be the stress. So, the stress level in this one can be found out stress level in this one can be found out. So, because deformation is known. So, strengths in this one you can obtain. So, the stress level can be found out because same stress will be transferred through through out. So, one can find out the stress level and the demake gauges or other kind of gauges you can actually apply in the concrete to find out the strength that would occur. At the same time you must have control specimen in order to obtain the variation due to temperature and any other aspects that will be there. So, this should be have four such four such rods and through which there will be some nuts there also and that is how you do it. So, the it is manually tightened essentially to manually load is applied manually. So, it is actually a simpler setup but the problem is see there is no spring here. So, therefore, the due to deformation because you do not have a way you know you do not have a way to unless there is a feedback system and you have a way to check that there is a the load is same this this will not tell you whether load is remaining same or not because of some of the deformation reaction might get reduced and in the process you might end up getting somewhat load reduction may occur. So, loss of load may take place. So, these are basically creep measurement not too many facilities are available in many places is not a very common facility to have this but those who are doing research may have to you know setup this kind of facilities or wherever people do research creep research on creep this kind of facilities the other one would be obviously better a stm 512 type but something simpler one can also device. So, this is what is creep measurement this is what is creep measurement now let us see what is effect of creep effects of creep are let us see what are the effects of creep. First of all it will you know increase the deflection in flexural member you cannot imagine this this is my flexural member and say simply supported system and I have applied load here. So, what will happen in the long run the deflection will increase. So, elastic deflection deflection and later on deflection may increase further. So, elastic deflection and later on deflection may increase. So, this could be creep this could be due to creep this could be due to creep. So, this could be due to creep all right. So, increases deflection in flexural member that we have understood. So, while taking account of you know like deflection control the modulus of elasticity value that you take must account for the creep as well because it is a long run behavior because what we have seen earlier was this this is your epsilon this is your sigma this will be the elastic scenario elastic and this is due to the creep at some 7 days or some you know like. So, the creep will act here and then 128 days and so on. So, finally, the modulus of elasticity is at this point. So, there is some effect of creep and it must take into account of you know it must take this factor into account. So, therefore, deflection calculation must the modulus of elasticity used for deflection calculation and the code actually does that code takes those values into coast code takes those values into account. Now, you see the creep results in gradual transfer of load from concrete to river in columns you know basically if you have loaded a column loaded a column. Now, the load is coming on to the you know column it is coming on to the column. Now, the bond exists all right, but you know more this stress stress more in or through the more the stress increases or this reforms more this will have a tendency to transfer this because they are under same deformation you know this materials are in parallel. So, this is your river let us say this is your this is your river this is the river this is the river this is a river these are river. So, they will have same deformation they will have same deformation they will have same deformation these two will have same deformation river and these will have same these are river these are river and they will have same deformation because you know they are acting in parallel. So, if you have load like this they will have same deformation you know same deformation. So, deformation will be similar. Now, when deformation is similar, the you know deformation is similar and deformation increases. Overall deformation increases because concrete is creeping, concrete is creeping under creep concrete is getting additional deformation. Actually, it would try to reduce that deformation or you know the deformation to the or the strain to the rebar as well to the rebar as well. So, therefore, next time there is gradual load transfer takes place from concrete to the rebar. So, with time gradual deformation, you know gradual load transfer will take. So, when steel yields further, load is transferred to the concrete. So, only after steel, yielding of the steel, the further load will be transferred to the concrete. So, in eccentric column, creep increases deflection and effect of buckling. So, now, obviously, in eccentric column where there is a load is coming here, this is your column. So, actually this deflection would you know this deformation downward deformation would actually increase the effect of buckling because this was bending, this was bending under the moment, you know eccentric column. So, there is a P E F F F P E and this would P E would result in bending of this one. Now, creep would tend to increase this bending and therefore, buckling would be you know increasing. And again you take in terms of the E E you take in calculations of all this modulusable elasticity must take account of all this factor into account. So, this is done while doing in design. So, nothing to really specifically one got to look into, but the design E must take account of all this aspects in the long run creep effect and so on and so forth. In statistically indeterminate structure creep relieve stress concentration by relaxation and reduces shrinkage stress. So, in statistically indeterminate structure now, what is an indeterminate structure you have actually restraints additional restraints. For example, a determinate structure will have possibly roller and a hinge here. So, this can move, but you make again another hinge. So, two hinge here it becomes indeterminate. So, therefore, it is actually restrained. So, statically indeterminate structures are restrained they are restrained. Now, we have seen when you apply restrained when you put in restrained there is some amount of relaxation will occur, some amount of relaxation will occur. So, therefore, the stress in the concrete will actually reduce down stress in the concrete will reduce down. So, it causes relieving because there is some relieves in the stress. So, when there is a you know like basically creep put a caused some sort of deformation, but then this is restrained no movement can occur. So, therefore, this horizontal movement so, additionally you will have additional force coming in. So, therefore, this will neutralize the effect of this will neutralize neutralize the effect of applied stress and relaxation will actually reduce and it will reduce stress concentration. Also shrinkage stresses get reduced. You know shrinkage stress for example, if you shrinkage stress in a restrained element, shrinkage cracks would be tensile because this actually is natural position is here. It you know after shrinkage it will shorten you will discuss about shrinkage later on, but shrink position is somewhere there, but it is restrained. So, there is a tension now this tension gets actually relieved because of you know tension gets relieved because of relaxation. So, this actually relaxation has actually tendency to reduce all kind of stresses including in you know in in a restrained structures, because relaxation occurs only in structures which are restrained which are restrained where you know they you are not allowing any deformation to occur. So, they actually reduce on the stresses of all kind whatever they are including shrinkage stresses etcetera etcetera. So, this is the first effect then in mass concrete of course, creep and hunts cracking possibly by causing more thermal deformation under temperature differential. Now, mass concrete the cacking comes because this is your top surface of the concrete and let us say this is your bottom concrete. Now, there will be a temperature differential if it is existing if there is a delta t delta t exists between this one which can exist because if t could be higher higher temperature higher temperature in mass concrete temperature can be higher because heat may not dissipate from this portion the heat may not dissipate from this portion heat dissipation is difficult while heat will dissipate from this one heat will dissipate. So, heat dissipation will occur here heat dissipation will occur here heat dissipation heat. So, heat dissipation will do occur. So, heat will dissipate from dissipate from this portion while this may remain still hot this may remain still warmer warmer if I may put it so warm on. So, this may remain warm on result is what this will try to shrink, this will try to shrink, this will try to shrink, you know, this will try to shrink. And if it tries to shrink, the bottom concrete will restrain it. So, bottom concrete provides a kind of restrain. So, restrain here there is a kind of restrain to that shortening. Now, if this is happening net effect is a kind of tension, net is a tension. So, the cracks can come like this. So, net effect is a tension. Now, what can happen? There is a temperature differential, there is a tension and there is no, you know, there is a tension actually occurring. So, thermal deformations under the same tension, thermal deformation might try to increase, thermal deformation might try to increase. That means, you know, and it is again restrain at the bottom. So, therefore, this might result in, you know, causing more thermal deformations. So, it can cause more thermal deformation because, this is a, it is trying to expand under, you know, this or rather this is trying to contract and this might try to contract further, this might try to contact further over the time period trend. So, there is a contracting, there is a, or if there is a tension, it will try to tension is trying to, you know, like cause deformation in a given direction. So, under same tension, deformation will tend to increase, deformation will tend to increase. So, therefore, whatever the force is, this is causing this tension, tension comes because it is restrain. So, basically, this, this, this, this restrain still exist and because of the contracting forces, this may further, you know, like, you know, enhance the deformation. So, essentially, depending upon the situation, deformation might, you know, this thermal deformation in case of temperature, it might cause it to increase because, cracking possibility might increase because of the thermal deformation. Now, it is actually trying to contract, I am holding it in position. So, there is a kind of tensile force acting. Now, since there is a, you know, like tensile force acting, which is a tendency to cause a deformation in the, which is, which is actually restraining, you know, which is because of the restrained, the, you know, the restrained tensile force, which is a restrained. So, the tensile force comes and concrete can crack under those tensile loading. Now, when you have the, the sustain, this condition is sustained and no crack has occurred. Actually, further contraction may occur because of the tendency of the contraction, may be there because of the, you know, because of the, because of the creep itself. The, it may actually cause under more time to, to sustain temperature differential. This effect may get enhanced and if it has not cracked earlier, it might crack later on. So, mass concrete, this can actually, tall building differential creep in inner and outdoor column may result in additional moments. So, how does it do? In very tall building, this is your outer column and this is the inner column. So, outer column, let us put it red, outer column is here by red, outer column here is red and this is inner column. So, this is, this is inner column, you know, this is actually inner column. So, if I look at it, my slab is something like this. Now, the load that would be shared by this column would be coming from this portion of the slab. While, this column will share more load, you know, internal column actually shares more load. The contributory area, catering to inner inside column should be more. So, actually it has to share. So, this contributory area that from which the load comes into inner column would be more, you know, it would have to support more. Whereas, outer column only half of it comes, you know, from one side. That means, this is loaded at a higher level. So, sigma 0 is high and we have seen all our definition was for unit stress. So, if the stress is more creep strain, final creep strain will be more. So, because our definition swear specific creep etcetera, etcetera, all wear for unit stress, creep function, they are all for unit stress. So, you want to find out the deformation in the long run, more the initial stress level sigma 0 more will be the creep deformation. So, this will be deforming more. So, creep differential creep. So, this will have more creep than the peripheral column. You know, this will have more load sharing. Therefore, more creep than this one. Now, what is this result? If it is a short structure, not a very tall structure, it may not have any effect. But, if it is a very tall structure, the column length is very, very high. So, this might result in overall shortening of the column, you know, which may be appreciable. This effect is not seen in relatively shorter building. Only in tall building say 30, 30, 40 story building and so on so forth, one if calculates out the difference in the creep deformation over the long run from internal column and external column, there will be some differences. Now, when you have settlement differential settlement between inner and outer column, this settles more than this. This will actually induce some kind of stresses, you know, 6 C i over L square or whatever it is because of the settlement. So, delta 6 C i is delta over L square, you know. So, if the delta is appreciable, it may induce additional stresses. So, this is one effect in tall building. This is taken into account 50, 60 story building or similar building, 40 story building one would like to take effect of this or not 50, 60, 45, 50 buildings. So, R C C building or similar kind of buildings this might effect might be there. This sinkage also does effect in the similar manner, but we can look at it at F Department. Loss of priestess is other effect. Priestess is lost in many ways actually. Priestess loss occurs in many ways. First of all, first during slippage can occur. You know, you have priestess in post tension. Let us say is the system where you have pulled the wire and anchored it. Now, there can be some losses right here at the beginning. So, there can be loss of priestess because of slippage of the priestess in wire through the anchor and all that. But, creep does cause loss of priestess due to relaxation. That is what we have seen in the last lecture. Creep causes, you know, loss of priestess due to relaxation effect. So, therefore, that is what we have seen. Even creep of steel is important here because creep is tension. So, but it is restrained. Its deformation you know, it is length is fixed. Now, due to relax you know creep, its natural length will actually tend to increase. But, you have restrained it from expanding further. Therefore, there will be some amount of relaxation. So, the creep of steel can result in loss of priestess. But, we are talking of loss of priestess due to creep of concrete and that we have seen in the other day that relaxation will cause loss of priestess. So, these are the effects some of the effects some of the effect of some of the effect of creep on structure. Now, creep is also related to fatting which I just mentioned somewhere in the sixth module at the end of the line of fourth lecture. But, let us see how it is related. This is for almost all material many materials. So, this kind of behavior what is said is if you see this is time this is strain and after loading. So, you have loaded this is elastic strain this is elastic strain. So, this is your elastic strain remember then there is a creep. But, beyond certain stress level this goes on increasing we have seen in case of concrete course in normal lower load level it actually tries to be asymptotic. But, anyway the slope has in many material slope will get reduced and it is like a linear constant rate increase and as you go further high at high strain at very high you know long run at high strain it may actually result in it may actually result in failure. Because, suddenly there may be lot of deformation. So, rate might increase again the high rate here which is tendency to reduce and here low rate tendency to increase and somewhere here failure may occur. So, failure can occur due to creep at higher level of load. Now, this is called elastic strain this is called primary creep up to this before the linear range starts this is called secondary creep and tertiary creep again it increases non linearly and the failure occurs. So, tertiary creep stage secondary creep stage and primary creep stage and concrete also shows this behavior about point 6 to point 7 or 60 to 70 percent of the strength. So, therefore, you know where to operate on that is one thing. So, therefore, primaries and secondary creep etcetera and tertiary creep that is how we distinguish. So, concrete also exhibit this around 60 percent to 70 percent of the strength. But, interestingly you see this as you go repetitive loading after each step of loading because it is sustained it is you know time it is also sustained I mean you can assume you can assume supposing my cycle time is very high frequency is very low right frequency is low that means, one case I apply let us say 10 cycle per minute let us say for the just for the sake of understanding or 10 hard 10 cycle per seconds that kind of a reversal of stresses stress reversal I have a cycle of stress and I just you know I have a cycle of stress and let us say one cycle of stress going to maximum compression to tension again and this let us say finishes in constant let us say or even some sort of whatever it is rectangular I am showing, but it can be triangular triangular or something of this kind some sort of cycle of stress I am applying. Now, you see this let us say is 10 seconds then think of this being 10 hours or let us say 10 years now one cycle in 10 years means there is a constant load is there load is sustained but the value is changing value is changing. So, you know fatigue is a case reversal of stresses walkers are very fast rate cycle time is low, but if the cycle time is infinity it is actually sustained loading if the cycle time is infinity that is very long time to complete cycle practically my load is constant. So, therefore, that is actually a sustained loading. So, there is a relationship between sustained loading and fatigue. So, when I have reversal of stresses so it goes to you know it goes to minimum, but then the load is still sustained is not gone away. So, when I come back I do not come back to I do not come back to again this point, but I come back somewhere above because load has been sustained for certain period of time. Second cycle so cycle time is less as small you know it is a frequency is cycle time time time period is small. So, one over time period frequency is very high. So, very high low frequency extremely low frequency is 0 frequency is sustained loading low frequency 0 frequency is sustained loading high frequency is kind of fatigue. So, repetitive reversal of stresses so now next time it comes here then again I go back come back it comes here it does not come back to its original state of the strain actually you know it will not come back to your original state of the strain itself. So, basically because it is under sustained loading. So, slope of this line is same as the secondary you know a slope of this line you know it is somewhat related the slope of this line is related to secondary quick strain. Therefore, one can relate the fatigue strength or number of cycle it can withstand number of cycle it can withstand number of cycle it can withstand you know to the secondary creep rate secondary creep rate. So, this is a secondary creep rate strain per unit time if you look at this strain per unit time. So, one can relate this and this is what has been done experimentally people have tried to find out for concrete as well tension or tension and compression for various kind of materials one can think in terms of this. So, number of cycles to failure is in terms of log scale 10 to power 7 10 to power 6 etcetera etcetera that is related to secondary creep rate in log scale in log scale again secondary creep rate. So, you know it is per unit time it is per unit time. So, you it is seen that when your secondary creep rate is high secondary creep rate is high the number of cycle the failure to the cycle is low. So, it is related to linearly related to one can approximately linearly related to the number of cycles at failure number of cycles as failure. So, this is related to the secondary creep rate. So, creep and fatigue is somewhat related ok we did not discuss this the something called minor stool in fatigue although we are discussing creep but I like to just come back and discuss about this this you know it is a kind of damage theory a cumulative damage theory. So, let us say n 1 is a you know number of cycles to failure number of cycles to failure number of cycles to failure at certain stress level at certain stress level you know reversal of stress level certain stress level stress level plus reversal and n 2 is the number of cycles to failure in another stress regime if I may say so. In the first one I am going to some level of stress and coming back in the second one possibly I am going to compression and so on so forth. So, there is a regime could be different and it requires n 2 2 failure n 3 similarly another regime of another you know cycle of stress the amplitude of the stress could be different time period could be different and corresponding to failure is this. Now, I have subjected cumulative damage supposing the structure or element of the structure is subjected to n 1 number of cycles in a particular regime of stress reversal whose number of cycles of failure is capital n 1 then this is the damage. So, damage is n 1 divided by n 1 where this is the number of cycles still failure and this is a cycle actually I have applied. So, the fraction of damage is given by this now the fraction of damage for another regime is this. So, when this sum total of k such regime is equals to 1 we say that failure is occur. So, therefore, this you know mine this is minus rule so, fraction we can accumulate the damages this is the damage this is another damage and this is another damage in another stress and this is another damage and so on so forth. So, when in some total the whole total of fraction of damage as soon as it becomes 1 if as long as it is less than 1 no failure. The moment it is 1 actually the failure would occur. So, this is my what is minus rule. So, when cumulative damage is equals to 1 you know the failure would occur now what is relevance actually what is relevance how it is useful supposing I know I have subject you know my my layers in a bridge there is any bridge you know I know the vehicular load it is pattern was available now till date and n 1 number of cycles have actually has occurred under that kind of load. Now, the suddenly the load has changed the pattern has changed and you know corresponding to this failure number is n 2 and n 1 is a number of cycles for failure in the so far whatever has been happening. So, now I want to find out how many years or how many number of cycles it can withstand. So, what I know is n 1 by n 1 is known to me and plus n 2 which is my unknown n 2 divided by divided by n 2 this must be equals to 1 for failure. So, n 2 is unknown n 2 is unknown and that I should find out. So, n 2 is actually unknown. So, I can find out the number of cycles that it can withstand in future. So, residual number of cycle or residual life if I may say or residual damage that is possible you know or residual life that is possible under fatigue situation I can really find out. So, this is minus rule which I thought should be important for us. So, this one can be n this n values can be found out from s n curves from s n curves from you know strength versus number of cycle curves which we have talked about alternative approaches to use secondary creep rate that is a measure of partial damage. So, secondary creep rate we have seen where secondary creep rate if it is known then number of cycle depending upon the creep rate the number of cycle it can actually withstand that we can find out. So, under a given load what is the creep rate that if I know under a given static sigma 0 what is the creep rate for that material if I know secondary creep rate that can be related to n number of cycle n capital n that can be related to capital n and then one can find out. So, this is minus rule. So, this is related to you know a creep and some related aspects we discussed. So, this is all about creep we can now just introduce this shrinkage for this class while we will discuss it details in the next lecture we will discuss it in the next lecture. Now, why does shrinkage occurs in concrete. So, so far we have seen deformation is increasing. So, its compression its compression the creep such under sustained loading it will further differ. Now, why creep and shrinkage is put together you know both are related to gel pores and perhaps mechanism one can look into movement of water from the gel pores. We have looked into creep and we said that is essentially movement of water interlayer water and so on so forth either within inside relocating itself. So, therefore, the bond can get disturbed and slippage of can occur and then it can reestablish itself and so on so forth that is what we have looked into. Now, of course, it is somewhat similar to you know long term consolidation in clay the creep because consolidation takes a very long time. So, you have the load immediately there will be some consolidation, but the water moves out and further some analogy some analogy right. Now, shrinkage is also movement of what related to movement of water from the gel system and that is why they are studied together they are put in the same module. So, when does why does shrinkage occur? When does shrinkage occur? First of all in concrete shrinkage occurs in concrete shrinkage occurs due to hydration process loss of water due to and also due to loss of water due to evaporation. So, hydration process causes some amount of shrinkage we have seen it somewhat will be looking at it again and evaporation loss of water would occur both in plastic state of stage of concrete and later on in the drying stage of the concrete as well. So, first is the plastic stage there could be some evaporation because the bleeding water bleed water might come at the top and subsidence occur plastic settlement might occur and obviously, that is also kind of volume change and then later on also evaporation can occur. But right in the beginning because of hydration process itself the volume of the hydration product is lower than the original volume there are some shrinkage which occurs. So, that is what it is so volumes generally there is a volume strain it is not actually linear strain it is essentially volume strain volume metric changes are occurring. But we measure the linear strain and the no shrinkage when we talk of we talk in terms of linear strain that is in micro strain 10 to the power minus 6 order of 10 to the minus 6. So, we measure it that way. So, that is what I said volume of hydration product is so very in the beginning in the beginning volume of the right in the beginning of the hydration process right in the beginning of the hydration process volume of the hydration product is smaller than the volume of the unhydrated cement. We have seen that while we looked into the cement hydration process and we actually calculated that as 0.059 CH or 0.06 CH if you remember and that is what is chemical shrinkage. So, what is it actually volume of the you know if you recollect if you recall back this was your volume of unhydrated cement you know unhydrated cement basically C plus W and finally there is a reduction in the volume finally there is a reduction in the volume there is some unhydrated cement there is some hydrated cement and there are you know all those put together but there can be some loss of some volume reduction was very much there when you know what we have seen earlier there is some reduction in the volume and this volume reduction this reduction in the small volume that is actually chemical shrinkage that is chemical shrinkage. So, there are several components of shrinkage this is chemical shrinkage. So, chemical shrinkage actually one can estimate how stoichiometriqually using the stoichiometry you can actually find out the product that would be formed from different compounds of cement C 3 A C 2 A C 3 S C 2 S all major compounds of cement or even our other smaller at range at formation and so on which actually causes a volume expansion right in the beginning first you know within the structure. Total volume change actually you can find out and original volume of cement and water is known because specific gravity of cement is known water is known. So, therefore, what is a reduction in volume one can find out because of a chemical reaction itself and that is called chemical shrinkage. So, this can be estimated this can be estimated this can be estimated chemical shrinkage can be estimated then there is something called autogenase shrinkage now it is actually some volume change locker to the even even this is also relatively early stage in a macroscopic is a macroscopic reduction in length under constant temperature and without moisture migration to or from from the concrete. So, if you seal a specimen so that no water can go out of it no evaporation nothing is occurring and it is maintained at constant temperature also then there is some amount of you know volume change can occur volume change can occur and that is called autogenase shrinkage because a plastic material is now changing into a solid material. So, there are some volume changes associated with this and this is you know it is changing into a solid material one is a chemical reaction other is a plastic material changing into a solid state and therefore, there is some amount of volume change. So, if you even if you seal it no do not allow water to go away no evaporation loss but these are these are more of you know so, this is still volume change into locker in paste and they can result in some sort of cracking and all that as you shall see later on. So, this is autogenase shrinkage and chemical shrinkage and plastic shrinkage is also terminology used quite often because for practical use practical point of view understanding point of view chemical autogenase shrinkage they are very useful. When it comes to practical point of view you see the volume change that is occurring during the plastic stage is the plastic shrinkage. So, it is the volume change that concrete undergoes during the plastic stage and usually that could be due to loss of water loss of water by evaporation. So, what you have you will have something like this this is your concrete and you know because specific gravity specific gravity of cement is 3.15. So, it will have a tendency to come down and water has a tendency to come up. So, you will have water coming in you know you will have water coming in here water coming in here and accumulating bleed water and if it evaporates or even otherwise there is no bleed water but to some water evaporates from here more water will tend to move upward and therefore, the solid will subside settlement to docker. So, therefore, this there is a volume change associated with this because of loss of water by evaporation and quite often this is actually referred to as plastic shrinkage plastic shrinkage. Now, the settlement has got a role in fact, it can cause cracking plastic settlement can cause some sort of cracking I think I mentioned some day earlier I mentioned some day earlier all right. Then, drying shrinkage drying shrinkage occurs in hardened concrete as it is drying. So, once they are solidified and now it is hardening at this stage if there is evaporation loss that actually loss of water from the gel system can cause shrinkage and this is called drying shrinkage. So, later stages drying shrinkage you docker drying shrinkage is occur because of the evaporation loss you know loss of water due to evaporation and this can continue for months one or two months in fact and within six months of course, by and large this will be complete and this is one of the reason this is reason for cracks in many thin sections this is reason for cracks in many thin section right. So, let us see plastic shrinkage more plastic shrinkage more plastic shrinkage is due to loss of water at 20 degree centigrade and 50 percent average this diagram shows this this for cement paste and you can see the x axis is time in hours. So, time along this axis time along this axis time along this axis and time along this axis. So, time is along time is along this axis right and time is along the x axis and y axis I have shrinkage this is for paste this for cement paste. So, cement paste shows lot more you know it is about three four hours lot of shrinkage it should show initially it is not very much in fact, there can be small expansion also for a trenchite and all that permission and this dotted line shows large quantity of cement in case of concrete now concrete with 500 kg of cement is somewhere there this is for one is to three motor. So, that means, you have lot of cement here. So, cement paste needs cement paste shows maximum cement motor shows somewhat lower and this is with 360 kg meter cube of cement. So, higher the cement content more is this you know shrinkage during the initial stage itself. So, this is plastic shrinkage test test you know shrinkage as has been seen for paste motor. So, aggregate has a tendency to cut it down aggregate has a tendency to cut it down. So, this is plastic shrinkage drying shrinkage there can be some irreversible component in this. Let us see what is drying shrinkage see if this is the this is again the edge this is the edge this is edge and this side is deformation this side is deformation. So, you have you know like this is your T 0 and from this point you started drying. So, this is stored in air and you will find the strain deformation increases you know deformation shrinks. So, deformation has increased when you know shrinking or reduction we are calling it as this side while swelling if you constantly keep under water this is it will swell it will swell actually. So, swelling is to occur you know swelling is to occur under constant water condition while if you are drying it will go somewhere there. So, this is the drying shrinkage this is the drying shrinkage and then supposing you put it weight weight again. So, therefore, then it will come back. So, this is reversible shrinkage you know so, you have moisture coming in, but it does not come back. So, this is the some amount of irreversible shrinkage. So, this is reversible this is reversible and this is irreversible shrinkage irreversible shrinkage. So, with age this is elongation this portion is elongation this is contraction. So, if you are dry if it is drying then there will be. So, T 0 drying has started we find that it increases in this manner, but there is some amount of irreversible shrinkage everything do not come up because you know reversible shrinkage moisture comes in and then reestablishes some of this. So, easy reversible component is due to formation of additional bond in the cement gel when adsorbed water has been removed. So, when you have removed the adsorbed water new bonds have been formed like we said even creep you know. So, new bonds should have formed where water has gone the bonds have gone, when there was type of bonds have gone, but some relocation would have occurred a new bond would have formed. When you add water this is this takes wherever there was no bond some bond might form, but some cases were new bond has formed that leads to irreversibility this leads to irreversibility. Then we have situations of reversible drying shrinkage reversible drying shrinkage. So, you can see that this is the drying that is occurring this swelling wet saturated and then again I have actually wet it dry wet it dry you know and so on so forth. So, this is drying this is wetting. So, it will show a cyclic behavior it will show a cyclic behavior it will show a cyclic behavior right. So, this is what it is now carbonation shrinkage carbonation shrinkage occurs carbonation is a phenomena where carbon dioxide from the atmosphere reacts with calcium hydroxide to form actually finally calcium carbonate plus H 2. We will discuss this a little bit later more in the context of durability and it is this product occupies less volume then the original calcium hydroxide in presence of water all this happens. So, there is a shrinkage associated with carbonation process and you know if you have measured it total shrinkage is this one total shrinkage is total drying total drying plus carbonation and drying alone if one measures will be something like this right relative humidity percentage shown 20 40 50 60. So, as you increase the volume change occurs like this. So, this shrinkage so net difference is the carbonation shrinkage. So, therefore, this is the difference this difference is drawn here as carbonation shrinkage. So, carbonation shrinkage so carbonation shrinkage and you can see it is maximum around 55 percent relative humidity. So, carbonation occurs maximum at 55 percent relative humidity or 50 to 60 it is at very high level low humidity does not occur high humidity does not occur because presence of moisture is essential and presence of air is also essential. So, at very high humidity presence of air is low this reaction will not continue in fact, I should write right here H 2 O. So, in presence of H 2 O this will occur and this comes from air. So, therefore, if it is fully saturated less of carbon dioxide will be available in the air and if it is fully dry again relative humidity is low less of carbon dioxide. So, this is called carbonation shrinkage. We will discuss about this later this is of course, not very important it is just important while other two are very very important and we look into those and one has to estimate them because shrinkage can cause cracking inside a type of structures. So, that is what it is. So, we have introduced the shrinkage that is we said chemical shrinkage autochromous shrinkage plastic shrinkage and then we talked about drying shrinkage carbonation related shrinkage right. So, next class we will look into a factors which will affect the shrinkage aggregate water cement ratio or humidity volume to surface area of slum fine aggregate to aggregate air content and cement content. The amount of shrinkage due to carbonation is relatively less. So, we will not discuss much about it I mean this is not you know this is not but the drying shrinkage really can cause problem. Carbonation shrinkage do not seriously cause problem not really cause serious problem the surface concrete might shrink but depending upon the extent it is it may cause cracking but very rarely this is not usually seen carbonation has got other issues. So, we will look into this but drying shrinkage and it is how what factors affected like this factors we will discuss in details in the next class. So, let us summarize this what you have to have seen in this class is actually what we have seen in this one is summarize to summarize this actually first of all we looked into prediction prediction of creep BS then we looked into measurement then we looked into effect and in the process of course we also looked into relationship to fatigue minus rule etcetera etcetera and lastly introduction to shrinkage into to shrinkage. So, this is what was this class related to so, this of course, your discussion on creep finishes but we will continue to discuss shrinkage in the next class and that is for the day that is for the you know this lecture. Thank you. === Lecture 27 Transcript === Welcome to module 7 lecture 3. In the lecture 2 of this module, we just introduced ourselves to shrinkage shrinkage of concrete, the different types of shrinkage. Namely, we talked of chemical shrinkage, plastic shrinkage, autugenious shrinkage and drying shrinkage. You know, the terminologies associated with them and what exactly they mean, we have defined them and then we just stated the factors influencing the shrinkage. Today, first we will look into mechanisms of shrinkage, mechanisms of shrinkage and then we will look into factors affecting shrinkage, factors affecting shrinkage and then prediction of drying shrinkage. You know, this is the most important one amongst all them, particularly in normal concrete. So, we will look into this. So, mechanism of shrinkage, like creep, it is again generally related to, it is again related to, you know, it is again related to adsorbed or interlayer water, like creep, it is. So, that is why they are dealt together, usually shrinkage and creep and they have similar sort of, you know, related sort of related mechanism with respect to microstructure of concrete. Then the movement of, so this is related to adsorbed or interlayer water, movement of this water out of the gel results in reduction in volume of CH. The capillary, you know, is characteristic of silicate hydrates. So, it actually results in reduction in the volume of CH. Gel. Now, when something is drying, when let us say, you know, drying is taking place, drying is occurring. Capillary tension is set up because there is an increase in the curvature of the meniskey. You know, capillary tension is set up because of increase in the curvature of the meniskey. So, when actually water is moved out, when water moves out, the meniskey curvature increases. And this sets up a kind of tension. This sets up a kind of tension. Increases the tension in a way. The tension, it increases the tension. And this is balanced by a compression. This is balanced by a compression in the system in the CHS skeleton. And this induced balancing compression actually causes volume change. So, this is one of the theories that, you know, capillary meniskey curvature increases. When water is moving out, this is well understood. There is no problem about that. Change in the meniskey because of, you know, withdrawal of water. So, as the water is withdrawn from the pores capillary meniskey, curvature of the capillary meniskey will increase its inversely proportional to actually R. So, the smaller the R, the larger the curvature is proportional to that. So, it increases. Larger is a curvature and that is what happens. So, induced, that is induced, you know, there is a tension increases and it has to be balanced. As a kind of compression is induced in the skeleton of CHS results in volume change or shrinkage. At lower humidity, of course, change in surface energy of the CHS due to removal of, firmly at water molecule, adsorbed water molecule is thought to be responsible for reduction of volume. So, you had adsorbed water molecule, adsorbed water molecule, water layers, adsorbed water layer. And as you remove this, so if you remove this, remove this one, remove adsorbed water. So, removal of adsorbed water, removal of adsorbed water results in change in surface energy. Because, you know, the adsorbed water was there very much and the moment water goes away, there is a change in surface energy. Now, this results in actually forces causing kind of, you know, causing kind of pull within the material and therefore, reduction in volume. So, this is another reason, there is a collapse mechanism sort of. So, this results in adsorbed water removal can cause actually change in the volume or shrinkage. So, this is another theory. So, first one was capillary tension theory as we said. Second one is surface energy as we are removing the water, the surface energy changes occur. And that results in surface energy changes would occur and that results in actually kind of change in volume or reduction in volume. And that is why shrinkage occurs. The another theory is that disjoining pressure, that of disjoining pressure. So, removal of water causes reduction in pressure and hence the volume. So, if you remove water, the disjoining pressure, you know, pressure would be reduced. Pressure which was, you know, it would reduce, the pressure would get reduced and the volume will reduce. So, pressure which was pushing them out, now it has got reduced. So, there will be, you know, in reduction in volume. So, pressure reduces, volume would also reduce, is there is idea pushing out pressure is reducing. So, there is a kind of change in the volume. So, this is all, this is another theory for shrinkage. And that, you know, this is the kind of theories that has been put for shrinkage and natural. These are the kind of possible theories that has been put up. But one thing is very clear, that it is a removal of water from the interlayer that causes shrinkage. So, removal of water may be even just internal removal from gel to capillary pores. Because the capillary pores itself has got emptied or change in the, you know, direction in volume because of the, one of course, was related to chemical shrinkage which is somewhat different. Chemical shrinkage is somewhat different because the reaction products occupies less volume than the original volume, reactants volume. So, this is a chemical shrinkage, but other cases can be associated with removal of water from the interlayer situation. So, particularly drying or similar shrinkage can be related to, you know, removal of water. So, since all these are happening, all these are happening, you know, this processes are not reversible. For example, if you add water, some of the capillaries might change by this time or some of the pores might have changed by this time because of the collapse mechanism, because of the shrinkage, the dimensions might have changed or whatever there may be changes, changes. And then formation of additional breaking of some bonds, formation of additional bonds that is possible. And because this process is phenomena, you know, if you add water back, the pressure will not be same as what it was earlier. Similarly, the surface energy, the acceleration if you do by adding water back, it may not be same exactly as before. So, putting all this together, the shrinkage is not fully reversible and this is possible because of change broken breaking of the bond and possibly formation of additional bonds. So, that is what we understand about shrinkage, its mechanism sort of. But one thing is very clear, drying shrinkage is more prominent than other shrinkages in normal concrete. So, this is what we talked was related to drying shrinkage and this prominent than other shrinkages in normal strength concrete. Autrogenous shrinkage, which we talked about in the previous lecture, this occurs in seal specimen because of creation of empty spaces. See, originally water filled spaces, hydration reaction is occurring. So, originally water filled spaces, you know, so this is water, this is cement. So, hydration reaction is occurring, this water gets consumed or this is sealed. Let us say this is this is all sealed, this is all sealed specimen. So, this water actually reacts and gets consumed, what is we call as self-tracication. But this leaves some words in the space because water filled spaces gone out, the volume of the, you know, hydration product is also known as a less. And this space is not being filled up fully and therefore, it can results in a kind of empty spaces. And that can, due to self-tracication process even if you have sealed it, no water we are replenishing. There will be water loss in the, after the skeleton has been formed, after initial setting has set has rockered. So, empty space remains even in sealed specimen because the water has got lost. Whatever water is still remaining was there in the sealed specimen, besides that some empty ports are created. And in this space are actually thought to be causing self-tracication. So, this self-tracication or autogenous shrinkage, self-tracication and then autogenous shrinkage. And this autogenous shrinkage is considered to be more prominent in low water cement ratio concrete. That means, your high strength concrete, modern high strength concrete, autogenous shrinkage may be more prominent than drying shrinkage. Because the in high water cement ratio concrete, there are lot of space or interconnected permeable pores system would be there. Through which water can evaporate out, so drying is more prominent there. While in autogenous, while in low water cement ratio concrete, the permeability is not very high. So, therefore, self-discication would cause consumption of the water and evaporation would not be as dominant as in normal strength concrete. So, self-discication will result in actually creation of new empty pores and that is thought to be causing a kind of shrinkage. As we have seen, I have defined earlier, there is a macro level dimensional change occurring in seal specimen and that is what we call autogenous shrinkage. So, they can be more in high strength concrete or low water cement ratio concrete compared to drying shrinkage. So, they are very important currently for high strength. We will see them might get somewhat better insight into this mechanisms, etc. When we look into also the measurement process because measurement separating the shrinkages different kind of shrinkages and measuring them, we will see how we can do that. So, we will see it in the next lecture. So, at the moment up to this on do. Now, then what are the factors influence, you know factors those influences shrinkage. Now, we just looked at them and we said that aggregate content and aggregate properties. This will be one of the major thing. Water cement ratio and time, curing condition relative humidity, volume to surface area ratio, slump, pine aggregate to total aggregate, air content and cement content. So, all these are related to, you know all these are the factors. So, so many factors actually influences the shrinkage. So, we will see one by one. Let us see the effect of aggregate. First of all, modulus of elasticity of aggregate. Now, we can understand this. We can understand this as I said, you know the stiffness is trying to shrink. Something is trying to shrink. I have one material and the other material. I have one material, I have one material and the other material. This is one material, this is the other material. And they are bonded and they are trying to shrink. They are trying to shrink. You know this is trying to shrink. So, let us say this shrinks by this amount. This shrinks by this amount. Now, paste shrinks aggregate do not want to shrink. This, this is let us say is aggregate. This let us say is aggregate aggregate and let us say this is paste. So, this will tend to shrink. This will tend to shrink somewhat. But this one shrink because aggregate is inert and its volume change you do not talk like that. So, as this will try to shrink, this will also try to bring it together. But this will then exert a net upward force to this. That means shrinkage of the paste will be restrained by aggregate. Now, aggregate how much it will restrain. For same strain, the stress would be more if the modulus of elasticity is more. So, if this is high modulus of elasticity, this will actually share more load for the same strain and it will be less loaded. Besides it will actually provide that restrain more. So, modulus of elasticity has a role. Modulus of elasticity has a role. So, aggregate modulus of elasticity. So, if you look at this, you know this is sandstone. This is shrinkage along this direction in microstrain time in log scale quartz. Now, quartz has got, it is very stiff. So, quartz is here, it is quartz is here, actually quartz is here, here is quartz. This is sandstone, this is limestone, this is granite, this is some gravel, this is basalt. So, it will depend upon stiffness of the aggregate itself. So, higher the modulus of elasticity, it will actually have less. You know shrinkage will be less because it will restrain the shrinkage. So, shrinkage will be less. So, time of time in log scale along this direction, shrinkage along this direction and different types of stones or same, all other things remaining same. And at different age shows, you know, less different shrinkage. So, stiffer one, obviously, you will show less shrinkage in the concrete. Let us shrinkage in the concrete, alright. Let us shrinkage in the concrete, alright. So, higher modulus restrain shrinkage. That is what we are saying, higher modulus restrain shrinkage, higher modulus restrain shrinkage. Volume of aggregate, that is quantity. Obviously, now this is very clear because if my, is a paste, which actually springs, aggregate does not. So, therefore, this is shown for two different water cement ratio, water cement ratio 0.35. This is water cement ratio 0.5, 5.0. So, this is 3.5, this is a 5.0, somewhat less. But you see the volumetric content of aggregate percent. So, volume percentage, you know, of aggregate, 100 percent aggregate, obviously, is not the situation, 0 percent aggregate. So, if the paste shrinkage is considered to be 1, this is relative shrinkage. Paste shrinkage is considered to be 1. With 40 percent aggregate, you will get possibly 40 percent shrinkage, you will get reduced by 60 percent. At 20 percent, it will get about 40 percent reduced. So, depending upon the volume content of the aggregate, shrinkage would get reduced. More volume means less shrinkage, less shrinkage, more volume means less shrinkage. Of course, when you look into the effect of shrinkage, but this we are talking of the shrinkage in the system itself. Shinkage in the system itself, there is a case where you have actually, probably low volume of aggregate. Shinkage in the overall system could be lower or shrinkage cracking could be lower. We will talk about that sometime later on. So, volume same aspects, you know, more the volume, because aggregate do not shrink. Therefore, more the volume, less will be the overall shrinkage. So, higher aggregate content, less aggregate shrinkage. Higher the aggregate content, less aggregate shrinkage. Now, one simply one can look into a simple empirical equation. This is the shrinkage of concrete. It can be related to shrinkage of paste into 1 minus g to the power n, where g stands for aggregate content. N stands for a value of 1.7. So, you know, it is a kind of, you can say square. Because this is a fitting, try to fit in empirical equation. So, s, you know, sort of s c by s p is 1 minus g to the power n, where g is the aggregate content. It is a non-linear curve. So, one can actually relate to this one. So, n is roughly about 1.7. n is equals to roughly equals to 1.7. So, this is an empirical equation. So, we can understand that more the aggregate content, lesser will be the, because this aggregate content, so more the aggregate content, lesser is a shrinkage. Water cement ratio. Let us see water cement ratio. So, this is we are plotting against water cement ratio, and this is the shrinkage. Now, volume percent, volumetric content of aggregate percent, this line is for 50 percent aggregate 50. This is for 60, this 70, and this 80. So, if you see 80 percent, you know, aggregate is 80 percent shrinkage will be lower. But as my water cement ratio increases, shrinkage increases. Water cement ratio increases, shrinkage increases. This we are talking mostly of the drying shrinkage. We are talking of normal strength concrete, not very low water cement ratio situation. So, we are not going below point 3. It is only up to 3. We are talking about, we are, you know, so we are looking at normal strength concrete, not very high strength concrete, where it is autogenous shrinkage, which actually governs, you know, which can be more than the drying shrinkage. So, this is essentially, we are looking at drying shrinkage for normal strength concrete. So, you see, as the water cement ratio increases, shrinkage increases, in all cases, you know, in all cases, shrinkage increases, as water cement ratio increases. Now, water cement ratio, increasing water cement ratio, obviously, would mean more capillary pores in the system, and which drying out, it is related to drying out, can easily dry out. So, this is higher the water cement ratio, it has a tendency to exhibit higher shrinkage, but absolute cement content has also got a role, because paste content itself, if it is high shrinkage will be more. So, this has got higher paste content, this has got less paste content. In other words, water cement ratio is one issue, but paste content is also an important issue. Now, paste content means, thus, it is some total of water plus, some total of water plus cement. So, water plus cement, so water plus cement divided by, you know, you can 1, and 3.15, specifically. So, this is the volume of water plus cement. So, paste volume will be this, paste volume will be this, we are not talking of pores or any cement or anything of that kind, if that is there, that will also add to the paste. So, this divided by, this divided by, you know, total volume, obviously, will give us relative paste content, total relative paste content. If this is high, my shrinkage is higher, shrinkage is higher, because paste is water shrinks, aggregates do not shrink. And in this one, again, if the water to cement ratio is high, water to cement ratio is high. So, higher W by C, higher W by C, higher W by C, shrinkage is more, higher shrinkage is more, more shrinkage is higher. So, for a given paste content, shrinkage increases with water cement ratio. For a given paste content, shrinkage increases with water cement ratio, because large amount of capillary pores, there is a possibility of more drying, drying is possible, more water may move out. And even with larger capillaries, the scope of emptying the gel, gel pore or interlayer water movement in the capillary space is now more. So, this is related to those aspects, this is related to those aspects. So, this was water cement ratio and of course, volume of aggregate, then relative humidity and age. So, if this is age we have seen earlier also with age shrinkage increases, we have seen that earlier also with age shrinkage increases, right, with age shrinkage increases. And in this case, of course, there is a reduction, if you have 100 percent relative humidity, which means that you will have some amount of swelling. So, this is 0 and this is 100 percent relative humidity, in fact, you will have swelling. So, this is swelling actually, this will be swelling. But if you have lesser, 70 percent, 50 percent. So, if you have lesser shrinkage goes on increasing, but then it tends to be somewhat, you know, flattening out in the long run. So, this is time and relative humidity. So, if it is fully saturated, there could be swelling. If the relative humidity is very high, close to 100 percent or just, you know, 90 percent or so shrinkage will be very little, but it is all related to drying. So, one can understand, when you have 50 percent relative humidity in the surrounding, which means the drying would occur, you know, drying would occur by evaporation. So, capillary water will get out by evaporation and as capillary tends to become dry, interlayer water will move out from gel pores, gel water will move out from gel pores to the capillary pores. As we have said, drying mechanism involves movement of this water out the shrinkage would actually occur. So, this is understandable, this is understandable. Now, volume to surface area ratio, volume to surface area ratio, it is almost similar to the situation of creep again, volume to surface area ratio. So, if you have higher volume to surface area ratio, volume to surface area ratio. So, this is the volume is here volume and surface area is the peripheral surface area, peripheral surface area in this case. So, this is the surface area, this is important. Now, surface area volume to surface area ratio, if it is large, which means that I have got lesser surface area per unit volume, lesser surface area per unit volume. So, I will have less evaporation. So, when volume to surface area ratio is small, I will have more evaporation. So, you know, more evaporation. If this volume to surface area ratio, this is S, this is S. So, V by S, more S per unit volume means more evaporation. So, less S per unit volume means less evaporation. In other words, V by S, V by S increases, you know, I will have less evaporation. So, therefore, for gravel aggregate and sandstone aggregate, shrinkage, ultimate shrinkage, that is long term shrinkage. Because, we have seen that shrinkage actually is a function of time. Therefore, one should talk about shrinkage at different ages. shrinkage at different ages. So, ultimate shrinkage is final, infinity at infinite time. And it is seen that it depends upon the volume to surface area ratio. So, we are talking again of drying shrinkage, not the other shrinkage, which are less dominant. So, we are talking of drying shrinkage at the moment more, which is more for normal shrink concrete. We will discuss something about autogenous shrinkage later on when we talk about measurements and so on and so forth. So, drying shrinkage is what we are concentrating on right now. And if you have large surface area, large surface area, less volume per unit volume or more volume per unit surface area, more volume per unit surface area, then shrinkage will be less. So, evaporation is less. So, this is what it is. So, you can see that this is a function of this related to evaporation loss right. So, loss of water decreases, loss of water decreases with volume to surface area ratio, with increase in volume to surface area ratio. That is idea that is idea. So, we will come to prediction of drying shrinkage, but remember we did not talk of some of the factors namely slum aggregate fine to coarse aggregate ratio, etc. Because we did not discuss this, let us just go back to that slides quickly, let us go back to that slide quickly quickly go back to that slide and see what are the things we did not really look into account for. You see we did not talk of slide slum fine to total air content cement content. Now, this is indirectly covered actually. This slump is there in the factor in the ACI, formula it is there, flowing concrete or less flowing concrete or something to do the water content. And cement content or something to do the paste content, air content would create some more void in the system and fine aggregate to total aggregate ratio because total aggregate has got a role it will be shrinking less compared to fine. So, this other factors are there, but rest all we have actually discussed. So, let us now look at the prediction of prediction of shrinkage like we did prediction of creep and similarly, I say formula and the British formula will look into. So, graph is some idea wise 14 to 35 percent of 20 years creep occurs in 2 weeks and 40 to 80 percent occurs in 3 months and 65 to 85 percent in 1 year. So, if you look at 3 months or so, majority of the actual shrinkage occurs in this. So, the problem related to shrinkage like cracking if there is any, growing shrinkage cracks if they come, they come very you know quite early in the life of the structure within 3, 4 months maximum 6 months usually it is 2, 3 months 2, 3 months the cracks come. Not you do not see them very long as a rarely 1 year versus mostly it come pretty early. So, therefore, this is important. Now, method appropriate to, method appropriate to normally it concrete is under is S C I 209 R method is can estimate using this and that is what we will try to do. That is what we will try to do and then of course, the British VSE and system would be there and we will discuss that as well. So, what it says you know shrinkage at any time when drying has started from T 0 would be given as S alpha which is the ultimate shrinkage this is given by this formula. So, shrinkage S T tau 0 this should be tau T 0 tau 0 at time T days measured from start of drying at T 0 tau 0. So, this is measured you know at time T days measured from start of drying so, drying start from tau 0 time and shrinkage is given. So, where this is infinity and you know related to the time. So, say kind of kind of you know hyperbolic equation as you can see that as this time increases this time will increase this will increase but there is a 35 added there 35 added there. So, how much how higher this would tend to actually this will tend to a constant value that is ultimate. So, it will get related to a fraction right. So, when this is very large this value is will be small compared to this right this is in days you know this is in days actually these are all in days. So, this is also in days. So, if you have something like you know large value of this one this will be nearly 1. So, as infinity is that is how we are defining so, ultimate shrinkage for moisture. But, if it is any other condition the formula will change any other condition formula will change. So, this is for steam curing this value is 55 for steam curing this value is 55 you know this value is 55 in other words the shrinkage is you know initial early days when this is small shrinkage is relatively lesser this is small this small let us say this value is small you know shrinkage will be relatively lesser because shrinkage will be relatively. Less shrinkage will be relatively less shrinkage will be less you know because this value is higher this value is higher. So, for steam curing is the ultimate shrinkage is related to the shrinkage at any time. So, shrinkage at any time t shrinkage at any time t when drying has started from tau 0 is related to ultimate shrinkage is related to ultimate shrinkage. Now, ultimate shrinkage you can find out ACI method 2 0 9 method actually tells you the procedure to find it. So, ultimate shrinkage is given by this formula 780 into 10 to the power minus 6 k 1 dash k 2 dash k 3 dash k 4 dash k 5 dash k 6 s and k 7 dash. So, like the creep formula creep formula had 7 such factors k 1 k 2 k 3 k 4 k 5 k 6 if you recollect depending upon curing condition depending upon curing condition then volume to surface area ratio, slump etcetera etcetera if you remember aggregate course to find ratio and all that. So, here there are such 7 factors here there are such 7 factors and here there are some 7 factors and each factors are related to the relevant property. For example, k 1 for steam curing k 1 for steam curing you know for steam curing 1 to 3 days and for 7 days for moisture curing. So, for you know k 1 is equals to 1 for steam curing 1 to 3 days and so it is a related to curing condition k 1 dash prime is related to curing condition. So, it is 1 for if you have done k of steam curing for 1 to 3 days and 7 days if it is moisture curing. So, it is actually the concrete condition we are talking of normal concrete again and this is largely related to drag shrinkage prediction. This is largely related to drag shrinkage prediction. So, if you do steam curing if you do steam curing for 1 to 3 days or moist curing for 7 days the k 1 could be taken as 1. So, that is the data for other cases you can actually find out from this table for example, moist curing 1 to 3 days you know this is 7 days. You know this is 7 days we have said is 1 and this factor if you are less curing this value increases if you are more curing this value reduces. Similar values are available for steam curing also. So, this is you can use simply k 1 equals to k 1 equals to 1 1.2 depending upon number of days the curing. So, part of the table has been reproduced part of the table has been reproduced for the purpose of understanding and getting familiar with the procedure. So, k 1 dash factor is related to curing the table for steam curing is separate or you know the way to find out is given and because that is given in the committee report S I 209. I have just reproduced the normal mass curing scenario only. K 2 is K 2 dash is humidity coefficient this expose our condition. So, this is 1.40 minus 0 1 h where h tends is relative humidity where your relative humidity is 42 80 percent. And this value is different if your humidity is more than 100 percent in fact this will be much less as you can as one can see. 3 0 k 2 factor would be you know 82 h relative humidity 82. So, this formula is given this for example, you take there is a 40 percent relative humidity. So, k 2 dash would be equals to 1.40 minus 0.01 into 40. So, which would be simply 1.40 minus you know how much it would be 0.4 1 percent of 40 is 0.4 0.4 1 percent of 40 would be 0.4. So, this is simply 1. And if it is 80 in this formula in this formula let us put it so 3 0 0 minus 0.03 into let us say 0.8 or 80 80 80. So, this would be you know sorry this is for 80 you can you can find out from this formula also. So, from this formula if I find out I get 3 minus 80 into 0.03. So, this would be 2.4 which is 0.6. And if I put in this formula 1.40 into 80 let us say just rub this off rub this off just rubbing off. So, this is 80 80 and 80 is you know 1.4 minus 0.8 which will be 0.6 again. So, from the both the formula you get it you get it because here the multiplying factor is more right. This value is more but this multiplying factor is more for example, if you have 100 then this will be simply 0. If you put h is equals to 100 then it is simply 0. So, actually there is no shrinkage, no shrinkage if it is 100 percent probability. So, this is a factor related to relative humidity this is a factor related to relative humidity. Now volume to surface area ratio K 3 depends on the member volume to surface area ratio. And this is a part of the table if it is 12.5 it is 1.35 you know we said that surface area more means more evaporation. So, as this increases there will be reduction and this reduces. So, 37.5 has been taken as a base case and if it is less than that then you will have more values. So, K 3 depends upon volume to surface area ratio right volume to surface area ratio ratio. So, for any other values other than 37.5 is given by this kind of formula. For example, if it is more than 37.5 but less than 95 then the formula is given as 1.23 minus 0.006 by s and t minus t 0 less than 1 here. If this is more than 1 here for this cases the formula is given 0.006 is fine but this is 1.17. So, you know this is basically depending upon this depending upon the age. So, it is less than 1 here the value is something like this. If it is more than 1 here the value is something like this and if it is more than 95 centimeter this is given by this formula for b is greater than. So, it is 1.2 exponential of 0.00473 b by s. So, you know the curves that we gave value we discussed earlier it is related to those curves right. So, that is how we find out the volume to surface area ratio K 4 is related to slum more the slum K 4 is more which means my ultimate shrinkage will be more. So, s is the slum so 0.0024264 s slump in mm so for 100 mm you know or 100 more the slump more likely to infect this talking in terms of the water content of the system. So, more the slum you know more is a shrinkage can look into K 5 we can look into K 5 K 5 is related to fines to coarse aggregate ratio. So, equations are given again if the fine to coarse total aggregate content is less than 50 percent in other words if my fine content in the concrete is less than 50 percent. So, equation is here this if this is more if more fines are there more shrinkage if lesser fines are there less shrinkage because coarse aggregate is the one which will actually restrict the shrinkage which will actually restrict the shrinkage. So, more fines in the system you are likely to have more shrinkage and if this is more than 50 percent fine is very high this value is relatively less you know 0.90 but this value is higher. So, 2 empirical formula is given is depending upon the fine content of the system fine content of the system right depending upon fine content of the system. So, K 5 is related to cement content and higher the cement content K 6 is related to cement content higher the cement content more will be the shrinkage because paste will increase and this is given in K g per meter cube. And K 7 is related to air content because air content means more void and therefore, it is related to higher the air content higher will be the drying shrinkage. So, what you have seen there are 7 factors through which you actually you can predict the shrinkage number 1 factor K 1 prime was related to curing. So, for the data mistaken as 1 to 3 days of steam curing or 7 days of moist curing which is a standard practice. So, if you curing less than that you will have higher value of K 1 if it is more than that then you will have lesser value of K 1. So, this is depend upon curing condition K 2 depends upon K 2 depends upon K 2 depends upon K 2 depends upon K 3 is related to volume to surface area ratio K 2 depends upon humidity condition. So, K 2 depends upon humidity condition K 3 depends upon member volume to surface area ratio and K 4 depends upon slum K 5 depends upon fine aggregate content and 6 depends upon the cement content and 7 depends upon the 7 depends upon the air content of the system. So, there are the 7 factors and it is pretty easy to calculate from this formula knowing all those factors and you can estimate the ultimate shrinkage and shrinkage at any other state. For example, at any other time when you have actually started drying at tau 0 can be related by the first to formula that I have given. So, therefore, you can predict the shrinkage at any time using this formula that is given in the 2 to 9 0 R. British method of course, gives 2 cases 6 months and ultimate that is 30 years shrinkage and swelling and it gives you when a kind of a no-mogram like we had 1. So, in British method what you do? British method what you do? Actually it is determined from figure cos a no-mogram for 190 liter per meter cube of water. For other water contents the proportional shrinkage values are calculated equations are available for estimation of swelling and shrinkage. So, like we talked about the creep you know in case of creep there was a no-mogram here also there is a no-mogram and you can estimate the swelling and shrinkage from 6 month or 30 years. You know ultimate shrinkage which we will see from the no-mogram is an open. But you know this method of course, is referring to a no-mogram is also slightly less elaborate because you can see the factors that it takes into account. While the ACI method of course, is definitely more elaborate taking as many factors as possible 7 factors as we have seen and it is easy to implement in a you know Microsoft excel or some such sort of a spreadsheet or similar sort of things. It is easy to actually utilize the method. So, there first formula is ST and T is in tau 0 is S 28 days 100 3.61 L and T minus tau 0 minus 12.05 to the power half. So, what you want to know at any time you want to find out with drawing started starting from tau 0 any time you want to find out with drawing starting from this date. First you have to find out S 28 S 28 and then you can relate this now S 28 can be obtained from 6 months or ultimate shrinkage by formula which are available. Let us see the case of this no-mogram this no-mogram as you can see it will be the relative humidity R H along this axis. So, it is varies from 20 to 100 and this is the average humidity in United King condition. This is the average humidity in average relative humidity inside in UK. But also it could be different. So, this side is shrinkage this is swelling. So, the value of shrinkage here is 0 you know y axis gives you ultimate shrinkage right ultimate shrinkage and this gives you that is 30 years shrinkage and this side this portion gives you 6 months shrinkage and which can be related to 28 days shrinkage. So, it is related to relative humidity one factor that is taken into account and the age factor there are two age it is given so, ultimate and basically ultimate and 6 months shrinkage which you want and they can be related to 28 and then at any age you can find out. Now, this is volume to surface area ratio in millimeter or in inch in bracket. So, for 75 millimeter volume to surface area ratio and 150 and 300 and here again 75 150 and 300. So, what is happening this 300 is this scale. So, supposing I have a relative humidity let us say is 60 percent. So, I go here and I know my volume to surface area ratio is 150. So, I will come to this scale and it will be close to 300 into 10 to the power minus 6 for 6 months and if I am to get for ultimate shrinkage for the same relative humidity then I go for this is for 20. So, this is for 150 you know this is volume to surface area ratio. So, this is ultimate 300 6 months will be somewhere here which is about 80. So, for 60 percent relative humidity if I have a volume to surface area ratio is close to 150 I will have 300 micro strains after 30 years while I will have about 80 micro strains after 6 months. Now, anything anywhere in between you know you can for example, this is this scale this is graduated. So, if you have volume to surface area ratio say 145. So, this is this is this is this is graduated from micro strain 145 then you have to actually interpolate between these two. You can determine for 75 and determine from 150 and then possibly as you know and then for 300 also but they are not linearly varying while this is 450 this 400 you know around this line this will be 400 less than 400 and this will be much less than 350. So, the relative one can even plot a curve with three points and then interpolate. So, some kind of interpolation is possible but this you can see is relatively less elaborate besides less less elaborate besides actually you know graphs are really come or some this way. So, you have on this scale is relative humidity 20 to 100 this curve is there which you can use in this no more gram here the for ultimate creep three volume to surface area ratio are given and from this curve you can arrive at the ultimate shrinkage knowing the volume to surface area ratio that you are about you know for 6 months shrinkage you are on this side. So, therefore, what we see is that this both this method can predict the shrinkage. So, let us summarize this then to summarize this essentially what we have looked into we have looked into mechanisms of shrinkage today and we have explained fully that it is really how it is related to interlayer movement of interlayer water. And the theories those are available we have been we have put them forward and we have understood that it cannot be reversible but you see this when you have more than one theories is it is not very easy to come out with a generalized mathematical formulation. So, therefore, you have empirical formulas of prediction of this one. So, we see we have seen on what does it vary what does it vary actually you know how what are the factors on which it vary we looked into mechanism then we looked into factors on what it varies and then the prediction as per various course that sort of way. So, factors major factors that we have seen of course is relative humidity, relative humidity curing condition relative humidity condition volume to surface area ratio and fine aggregate content in the total aggregate system slum air content etcetera. Now, some of those factors some of those factor and aggregate of course, the aggregate type we have seen. So, what are the basically factors which affect that we have seen and then we have seen the predicting formula predicting formula and we have also understood that it is possibly easier to predict through the S I method rather than the British method which is existing. So, the next thing that we will be discussing in the next class is the measurement of shrinkage. Now, one you know the leach et alias methods were used for measurement of shrinkage of paste conventionally and other is the chemical shrinkage. So, some modern methods are there that is what we will look into and then potential of shrinkage cracks that can occur that is what we will be looking into the next class. So, with that actually we will conclude our discussion today. Thank you. . === Lecture 28 Transcript === Welcome to module 7 lecture 4. We shall be continuing with the shrinkage of concrete mostly. Because at the end we will talk about a little bit about the thermal expansion of concrete. So we talked about some understanding of shrinkage earlier. We look at it at more details. When we look at shrinkage measurement, its relevance and I says lastly we will look at thermal expansion for a little while. Now like creep, shrinkage is somewhat less understood. Its not fully understood shrinkage of you know issues in concrete is relatively less understood. Of course if we want to understand it more then we must look into physical chemical fundamentals and that is what we are trying to do right now. Now to start that we must understand what happens in liquid gas interface. For example in liquid gas interface you know when pressure is applied on to the liquid the vapor pressure increases you know you apply pressure to the liquid. You apply pressure to the liquid. This is your liquid let us say this is your liquid say and you apply pressure here. You apply pressure here. You apply pressure here. Then vapor pressure increases molecules get squeezed out of the molecules will get squeezed out of the liquid phase and escape as gas. So if you apply pressure to the liquid you know liquid phase will get out squeeze out and escape as gas. Now if the equilibrium then is established if equilibrium is established then chemical potential of the liquid and vapor must be equal at equilibrium because there is no movement further no movement is taking place. So for movement you need potential of one to be higher than other. So you apply pressure to the liquid actually increase the potential therefore the molecules will move out as vapor. So therefore if I write chemical potential chemical potential mu l of the liquid must be equal to mu g at equilibrium and if I have to preserve this equilibrium any change in liquid potential. So pressure change DP must correspond to a change in gas potential. So if I when I have applied pressure to the liquid let us say DP is the pressure I have applied. So liquid potential changed and correspondingly the gas potential must have also changed otherwise equilibrium would not be there otherwise there would be no equilibrium. So therefore D mu l differential mu l must be equal to differential mu g where mu l and mu g are the chemical potential of liquid and gas. Now one can write D mu l as V ml molar volume of the liquid into DP because molar volume is not changing. So Pdv you know is the work done Pdv plus Vdp since DV there is no volume change so one can write as Vdp. So that is the work done or there is a potential change of the liquid and that must be equals to the gas potential change. So gas potential change is similarly one can write Vmg that is vapor molar wave into DP. DP is changing partial pressure. So here when we are talking about the gas it is a partial pressure, partial vapor pressure. So it is a vapor so we are talking about partial vapor pressure. I am assuming that you understand what is partial vapor pressure. It is a vapor pressure exerted or the gas you know pressure exerted by a gas when it occupies the full volume as the mixture. So partial vapor pressure would change. Now vapor can be thought of an ideal gas. Therefore the Vm can be written as RT by P for one mole actually so RT by Pdp. So Dmg can be written as RT by P, RT by Pdp and that is must be equals to Vmlp. Capital P stands for the pressure that you have applied to the liquid. This is the partial vapor pressure of the vapor. So therefore if you integrate this, if you integrate this both sides so you will get Ln P by P0 must be equals to you know if you integrate both sides you will get if you integrate this DP by P, if you integrate you will get Lnp putting the limits P0 to P. So vapor pressure change from P0 to P and that must be equals to Vml by application of pressure DP. So therefore Lnp0 is equals to P by P0 equals to Vml by RT dp. Now this vapor pressure change can occur because of applied pressure or because of things like because of phenomena like surface tension. So algebraically we can write it like this P by P0 will be equals to e to the power Vml by RT dp. Now liquid, so we are looking at the situations this vapor pressure this DP can change because of surface tension. So just look at the fundamentals of surface tension. You know liquid tends to adopt shapes to minimize their surface area to have maximum number of molecules interacting with the neighboring ones. Liquid always try to adopt shapes that minimize their surface area that is what you have seen. It takes the shape of the container and so on so forth you know it tries to minimize their surface area and to have maximum number of molecules interacting with the neighboring ones that is the property of the liquid and this is what leads to surface tension. So the work done work DW that is required work DW that is required to change the surface area by let us say DA small surface area DA is equals to gamma DA. So DW is equals to gamma DA this gamma is the surface tension. So you know the surface tension is basically the work per unit area or energy per unit area energy per unit area you know this is the work required to change the surface area because it has a tendency to attain a minimum surface area. So if you want to increase it you have to do work and that work is proportional to the constant of proportionality is gamma. So energy required per unit area that is actually surface tension that is actually the surface tension. So that is the surface tension. So minimization of surface area of liquid may result in formation of curved surfaces. Actually so you know because of surface tension the you know the surface tension property of liquid it may it results in formation of curved surface because it tries to minimize the surface area. Therefore when it is trying to minimize the surface area it is actually may result in formation of curved liquid surface right. So many is cuss and so on and usually the pressure on the concave side of the curve is always higher than that of the convex side because you know concave side this side the pressure would be higher then on this side always it will be higher because we will see that actually it will be higher because molecules will try to pull each other in a given way and the pressure on this side is usually higher. So let us say consider a curved surface which surface tension forces acting along normal to the perimeter that is what it is surface tension because it tries to pull the surface kind of a pull you know it pulls the surface tries to pull the surface say something like this. So this is a curved surface and the surface tension force act on to the perimeter because it is trying to you know minimize the surface area and it acts on to the perimeter either to you know to stretch it as much as possible stretch it as much as possible right stretch it as much as possible so that the thickness is minimum thickness is minimum right. So stretch it as much as possible the thickness is minimum so that surface area is actually minimized. So if I exaggerate this and draw it in this manner. So basically this is the forces acting along this direction on an elemental surface this will be the forces acting along this direction this will be the forces F A D F C D F B C N F A B. So this is the forces that would be acting now if you look at this forces the resultant force will be acting inward resultant force will be acting inward this is the radius along this curvature radius along this curvature and the resultant force will be acting inward because this is curved surface so the forces are like this and forces are like this. So resultant forces will be acting inward and one can write possibly in this manner one can write after looking at the equilibrium one may write an equation. So resultant force will act towards the center and pressure for the surface area results in what is called Young Laplace equation. So one can actually find out the resultant force acting inside and this will be a function of R 1 and R 2 it will be a function of R 1 and R 2 and gamma is the surface energy per unit area which means actually a force per unit length. So unit of surface tension is Pascal per unit length force unit per unit length and multiplied by the length multiplying by length in the perimeter and you know finding out the resultant force one can actually show for the unit area for the unit area one can show P inside is equals to P outside plus this. So P in is always higher inside that is within the convex side is always higher than P outside and this is gamma surface tension R 1 and R 2 is a radius of curvature in two directions that we considered and if it is a sphere spherical surface then R 1 is equals to R 2 and I can write it as R and Young's Laplace equation turns out to be P in equals to P out twice gamma by R. So you see the x because of the surface tension in the inside there will be excess pressure of 2 gamma by R and this excess pressure will result in change in the vapor pressure because we said if you change in if you change the if you will you apply a kind of pressure then there is a change in the vapor pressure as well and this gives rise to Kelvin's equation. So since the Kelvin surface gives rise to pressure differential of 2 is gamma plus R it results in Kelvin's equation which is talking of which actually you know is a model for equilibrium pressure at the interface of liquid and its vapor liquid and vapor. So liquid and vapor right so you see this is what is Kelvin's equation we have replaced the pressure D P by twice gamma by small R I am writing R is the radius because capital R is a universal gas constant capital R is the gas constant you know gas not gas constant. So it is a gas constant therefore small R is a radius of the capillary. So it is a vapor pressure because of the surface tension change change in the you know radius of curvature because of the change in curvature P 0 was original before the formation of curvature and now because of the formation of curvature this will be the pressure final pressure P 0 e to the power twice gamma by R V M L divided by RT. So that is Kelvin's equation that is Kelvin's equation can be written as some different form also or that is Kelvin's equation. So R is the radius of spherical surface and at R equals to infinity when R is equals to infinity P equals to P 0 that means for a flat surface P is equals to P 0 and it is under such situation no evaporation will take place I mean just let us say this is P R is equals to infinity R is equals to infinity at this stage right to start with and this no evaporation is taking place. Now as P changes small P changes R would decrease or rather R would R changes P would decrease up to the limit of the poor radius because beyond the poor radius this R cannot be smaller than this. So therefore R changes up to the poor radius and correspondingly P changes as well. So correspondingly P changes as well because it cannot be of this kind maximum you know maximum curvature would limit to R equals to the radius of the capillary tube itself. So if you are looking in a capillary tube so this will be you know the radius would be simply a simply would be equals to R. So pores gradually becomes empty according to the size from larger to smaller pores. Now once this reaches R further change in the vapor pressure you know would result in poor becoming empty. So in the drying case of drying vapor pressure changes as the vapor pressure changes the poor you know curvature will change and a time will come when curvature radius of the capillary of this curvature of the surface and the radius of the tube is same. Beyond that if still pressure changes then what will happen the pore will become completely empty. So this is the phenomenon of drying you know so drying actually so pores gradually becomes empty according to their sizes. So larger pores first get emptied and then comes to the smaller pores. So typically this is the large neck for this will get emptied and this is the inside you know at equilibrium of course this will depend upon the vapor pressure existing and the size. So capillary size and that is how actually drying takes place. That is how drying takes place. Now how it is relevant to our shrinkage so this is what it is when such drying is actually taking place you know this is the capillary this is my capillary the equilibrium is existing at this point. Now attention would exist here attention would exist here what are the tendency to because what are the tendency to what are the tendency to spread what are the tendency to spread what are the tendency to spread it will try to spread along this direction. So if it tries to spread the radius would like to increase it is you know perimeter will like to increase. In other words there is a tension acting in the water so the tension acting in the water is something like this and this tension is maximum just at the bottom of the meniscus and gradually reduces down up to the surface of the water outside. So if you have a capillary water rises along this direction water rises and the tension in the liquid is of this kind because liquid would like to spread liquid would like to spread. Here there is no tension because it is already spreaded here liquid would like to spread. So from here to the in the capillary in this one there is a tension now this in other words will actually exert a kind of compression onto this glass tube. So it induces compression into solid skeleton. Now if it is within concrete or paste cement paste then it will exert onto the paste interface, paste capillary interface. So the compression will be the paste matrix or paste skeleton will be actually under a kind of compression. Space skeleton skeleton will be under a kind of compression under a kind of compression right. So this will be under compression this will be under compression. So therefore a molecule you know if this this compression now let us look at this. If you look at the surface tension properties for the gel same thing similar kind like as liquid. So molecule will well below the surface is equally attracted by all surrounding molecule. For example a molecule below the surface it is attracted by molecules in the surrounding, attracted by molecules in the surrounding here. But the one up there one you know one up there actually one somewhere there will be attracted only downward it will be attracted only downward right upward there is no force. So that is so therefore if I bring in a liquid here if I bring in some liquid here liquid molecule here which gets adsorbed at the surface then the force downward force will get reduced this downward force will get reduced, downward force will get reduced. So downward force will get reduced all right downward force gets reduced, downward force gets reduced all right. So molecular the surface is acted upon by a result and in what force and surface tension results right. And when I for colloidal particles such as CHS gel this signifies this significant you know for CHS system also this significant and compressive force induced could be as high as to 150 MPa. So if it is dry there is a compressive force acting downward into the skeleton and this could be as high as to 50 MPa. Now I bring adsorbed water reduces this inward compression and surface tension and swelling results. So what will happen it reduces down the inward compression in other words surface tension of the CHS system has reduced. So swelling will result you know there are no molecule if there are no molecule adsorbed water then the molecule of the CHS or particle CHS system will pull the surface once inner inside and it it will induce a kind of compressive force. Now if there is adsorbed water this compressive force will get reduced in other words surface tension would reduce and swelling will result. So adsorption of molecule results in swelling adsorption of molecule results in swelling right adsorption of molecule results in swelling and swelling strain is proportional to the surface tension itself right. And so the surface is like this. So the strain that results in let us say because of water being adsorbed would be proportional to surface tension force and constant of proportionality is K which can be reduced related to modulus of elasticity modulus of elasticity of the gel which can be related to modulus of elasticity of the gel. So you see the change in surface tension because of adsorbed water results in swelling strains and this is this is energy per unit area can be related to strain therefore this must be related to the stiffness of modulus of elasticity of the system. So this one is again related to vapor pressure if we remember this one is related to vapor pressure. So if there is a vapor pressure change this surface tension would change you know vice versa if there is a change surface to curved surface results in change in vapor pressure and if there is a change delta y change because of water being absorbed it will also change the in the vapor pressure. So when when when water gets absorbed there is a change in vapor pressure and change in vapor pressure there is a change in vapor pressure and this change in the surface tension results in swelling. If I withdraw if I withdraw the water reverse will actually occur. So delta y 1 can write it like this this is for the moles you know N moles absorbed if N moles are absorbed one can find out how much is the delta y from the change in vapor pressure or rate of change of vapor pressure and so on so forth. So therefore swelling takes place when moisture is absorbed swelling takes place when moisture is absorbed and shrinkage takes place when drying occurs. So when drying occurs drying occurs you know it will come to drying occurs it will become smaller as the moisture is withdrawn R will become smaller R will become smaller and my vapor pressure change would be you know it would be vapor pressure change would actually occur vapor pressure change is occur and R would become smaller and at this smaller R the compressive forces onto the skeleton that would generate would actually compress the system right it will compress the system surface tension will change and it would actually compress the system more compress the system more. So there is a compression because of the capillary itself there is also compression because of the you know adsorbed water being withdrawn adsorbed water being withdrawn. So this results in drying shrinkage this results in drying shrinkage. So adsorbed water reduces surface tension surface energy and you know hence critical stress initiating fracture from the pores will also be lower. So since the surface energy becomes low if you recollect when we are talking of strength you know strength is the functional stress is a function of E T under root E T divided by pi into half of the crack width or pi R. Now surface energy is reducing when the actually moist it is becoming moist and therefore critical stress reduces therefore moist specimen exhibit lower compressive strength due to this dilation effect. So this is going back to our situation two things first of all if you if water comes in and it is adsorbed of the surface surface tension reduces and the compressive force which was pushing you know the gels matrix together now it will be dilation. So it expands but at the same time surface energy reduce therefore moist specimen shows lower strength. Now when you I withdrawn the water what will happen this surface tension in the gel will actually increase and therefore their compression in the system you know it will compress the gel particles inside and therefore its dimension change would occur so during drying. Besides that in the capillary there is a tension in the liquid itself which tries to in which in turn tries to kind of compress the skeleton. So capillary when there is capillary water depending upon the capillary size it will actually there will be a compression. So this compression you know this 10 this compression results in or DP changes in the liquid which in turn would actually cause a kind of compression to the skeleton both to this you know could be could provide explanation to drying shrinkage. So first of all when drying occurs adsorbed water is moved out there is a you know the pool by the gel particles at the surface by the inside particles becomes more there is a kind of compression so there is a shrinkage and also there is a tension at the you know at the in the liquid itself which wants to spread and it pushes the particle out. So when there is a drying this phenomena actually pushes this phenomena it comes to the finer and finer pore and this pressure is actually twice gamma by R. So R becomes smaller this pressure would increase and it would actually exact more compressive force onto the skeleton. Therefore these are the phenomena through which you can one can explain the drying shrinkage of cement paste or concrete and also by using same phenomena we are able to explain why moist specimen shows lower compressive strength. If you recollect we said that when specimen is moist it it exhibits lower compressive stress strength. That is because you know the stress it can withstand is less that is because the kind of a you know dilation would occur surface tension reduces gel particle expands gel I mean system expands and it can it can actually the surface energy is reduced therefore it requires lesser force or lesser stress to actually cause fracture. So both the two phenomena this same phenomena understanding gives us the you know why moist specimen is shows lower strength but it also gives us some understanding of shrinkage drying shrinkage process. So what is it first is a chemical shrinkage is a small quantity in the beginning and nitrogenous shrinkage is larger quantity drying shrinkage would follow. So this is various shrinkage you looked and then measurement must then cater for all these types of shrinkages which we discussed earlier in our previous lecture. Well Indian standard recommends a length comparator something of this kind for shrinkage measurement. So you have basically you know this there is a dial gauge you put your specimen here and there is a standard you put your specimen here and any length change you can measure. Basically there is a standard reference which is which which first is used to find out what is a dimension and you have actually a demac point here on the specimen demac point here on the specimen. So there is a tip which comes and matches and this dial gauge can tell you what is a dimensional changes. So this can be used for measuring length change and if it is sealed specimen then that would give you a kind of chemical and nitrogenous shrinkage may be together. While if you look at leach et alias method which is also measuring dimensional change in cement paste and it is in contained in sealed rubber bag. Contained sealed in a rubber bag and volume changes are determined by the weight change in water. So whole sealed bag you can put it in water and any change in volume together the rubber bag because rubber will expand or contract according to you know it is because it can expand or contract. So as per according to the expansion or contraction of the specimen so as the specimen contracts rubber bag will also contract and its volume change you can find out. That is leach et alias principle however chemical shrinkage can be measured by ASTM C1608 method and restrain shrinkage can be measured as per ASTM C 1581 you know this method right. So 15818 method. Now chemical shrinkage method how do you measure? Well you measure it like this you measure it like this you have actually cement paste here and then you fill it with water and there is a capillary which is graduated and you put in excess water just after mixing you know after mixing all this is happening after mixing. So you fill this with water and this is all water and there is a paraffin while added at the top to minimize any evaporation. So there will be no evaporation loss and as the shrinkage of this one occurs this capillary will come down and from the graduated capillary you can actually measure the amount of chemical shrinkage. So chemical shrinkage is because of the volume change of this one right so volume change of this one. So as the volume of this one shrinks this can volume change full water is there there is no evaporation loss nothing no drying nothing is occurring. So volume changes as we discussed that stoichiometrically you can find out how much volume change of the product to docker. So you can measure this chemical change of this is done in the RD stage. Now the other one is through shrinkage measurement is through ring test you know this is called ring test where you have this is your outer ring and this is the specimen hatched one and this is the inner ring right this is inner inner ring actually and then you can use strain gauge as two measures. So this is a ring test it looks like this outer ring concrete inner ring right and various kind of arrangement of course there is a base here and this is your concrete this is the inner ring and there is outer ring some dimension D etcetera etcetera this is a given in the code itself this is called ring test and in this one typically it looks like this you see you can see the concrete here and outer ring outer ring the inner ring inner ring somewhere there and inner ring you put in strain gauges inner ring you can put in strain gauges this diagram is showing actually demolded specimen you know polythene then they are covered with polythene sheets they are covered with polythene sheet to the inner ring still intact they are covered with polythene sheet sheet and this is also showing actually the ring situation and this is the demolded ring so it is covered with polythene now you have strain gauges and you can go on recording the strain because as the shrinkage occurs this dimension will try to reduce because you know this inner inner inner periphery to reduce and therefore in a in in in turn it will exert a kind of pressure inside this you know the perimeter of this one will try to reduce there is an inward is just opposite of a kind of hoop action inward you know trying to reduce the since it is shrinking perimeter length is trying to reduce so radius will try to reduce and there will be strains and this strains you can go on measuring with time and that will give you all kind of shrinkage for example autogenous shrinkage and in the long run if you just shrinkage drying shrinkage up to cracking if you have autogenous shrinkage means you have actually covered it with polythene no moisture loss should be there but if you allow it to dry in a given environment then you can find out what was the time required for cracking so this is an STM test and that is how we measure so restrain shrinkage of course now typically before that I can just draw a figure draw a figure I can draw a figure you know essentially figure would be something like this before this effect of shrinkage so you have actually shrink strain shrinkage strain with time you plot for ring test and this is with time it will vary for different conditions and you can find out so with time you know hours in terms of hours or days as much as you want to measure and this strains can be related to shrinkage so this strain is a kind of can be related to shrinkage so when your ring test the inner ring shows you inner ring shows you you know this is your concrete this is your concrete the strain gauges have been put in there strain gauges have been put in there so this strain gauges for this strain gauges you can measure the strain and that will tell you how much is the shrinkage actually occurring from from this you can calculate out the strength that would be occurring. So, that is called the ring test. Now, what is the effect of shrinkage? So, that is how we do the test. So, chemical shrinkage is measured by change in volume through a graduated capillary and autogenous shrinkage as well as drying shrinkage up to cracking can be measured by ring test that is what I just mentioned. You can go on recording this. So, this is what is a ring test from which you can measure. Now, what is the effect of shrinkage? Effect of shrinkage is restrain shrinkage causes can cause cracks in thin section. For example, if you have a wall, if you have a wall, you know it is a wall like this thin wall, right thin wall and is restrain construction joints are not given have not been given let us say. You might find cracks like this you might find cracks like this at regular spacing, especially if the curing is improper. This is not very uncommon in thin section something like 200 mm thick to let us say 200 to 300 at the bottom because if you remember we said it depends upon volume to surface area ratio. So, if the curing is not a liquid and drying is occurring in a thin section and there is no construction joint is a long wall let us say basement wall 30 40 meters without proper construction joint. This can result in this can result in cracks coming in all through thin section this comes pre cast elements thin very thin pre cast element. If it is shrinkage is restrain cracks can come and it could be through and through it could be simply through and through up to certain depth with a large them larger crack here and finer at the bottom or may may not go up to full depth something of this kind. So, this is this is a phenomena seen in northern India especially when you cast the concrete around may zoom when relative humidity is very low 10 to about 40 percent and the curing if it is not done properly this can result in cracking and this cracks you see normally within 2 to 3 months of the construction drying shrinkage cracks that is fairly common high strength concrete are susceptible to autogenous shrinkage high strength concrete are susceptible to autogenous shrinkage because you have lot of cement paste in the system and therefore, there may be you know susceptible to shrinkage. So, one has to see that one has to you know so, therefore, this is studied for low water cement ratio system autogenous shrinkage studies are important tall building you know very tall building this is your outer column let us say outer columns and where you have somewhere you have got inner columns. Now, drying here drying is different then drying here you know drying in this one drying there will be different. So, this could be shrinking more if it is drying more or depending upon the situation. So, if one shrinks if there is a differential shrinkage differential shrinkage or strain due to the shrinkage in a very tall building like creep differential creep because in case of creep loads were coming different internal columns are highly loaded where external columns are less loaded. So, in tall buildings loading because of loading the creep effect comes in but external columns may be drying differently than the internal columns depending upon of course, the climatic situation and if there is a differential strain coming in in very tall building 30 to 30 40 40 story building then you might find there are secondary you know because of this there are secondary moments that is coming in because of differential shrinkage this may result in additional moment like we discussed related to creep lot loss of pre stress is of course, the other effect loss of pre stress is of course, other effect because shrinkage means shrinkage with the natural dimension of the concrete would become smaller. So, there will be some amount of you know it will if it is restrained then there will be this would cause loss of some pre stress because you know it is it would have it would have tried to come to this dimension because of shrinkage but you have restrained it in other words you are actually apply a kind of tension. So, the pre stress can loss can be there because of the shrinkage of the concrete itself shrinkage of the concrete itself because of the shrinkage of the concrete itself. So, this is another effect but most important of course, is a cracking shrinkage cracking you know if it is restrained if it is restrained then tensile stress may be increasing like this this might be the induced tensile stress because of the restrained. And this will change with time because shrinkage will increase with time therefore, stress will increase with time shrinkage will increase with time therefore, stress with increase will time time right. And this is the tensile strength. So, in the beginning shrinkage is less than the tensile strength shrinkage could be less than the tensile strength, but if the shrinkage crosses the tensile strength cracking would come. Fortunately, there is some amount of relaxation because of creep because you have a tensile stress which is sustained with time. So, there will be some relaxation due to the creep effect because it is a sustained tensile because it is restrained structure. Restained structure shows shrinkage cracking the I have talking about the thin structure solid here very thin sections you know in the similar sections actually this is long long there is no construction joint in the basement wall thin basement wall evaporation rate is higher V by S you know volume to surface area ratio V small S is large. So, V by S is small thickness is less. So, therefore, V by S is less you know and there the evaporation rate is high curing has not been done properly one might have used even an accelerated to accelerate the strength gain or similar kind of thing. So, basically basically where curing is not proper this scenario is seen much a particularly in the hot dry desert sort of climate where relative humidity is very little or in a composite monsoon climate during the hot dry desert season. So, shrinkage will increase with time tensile strength also increases with time, but since it is sustained and restrained therefore, there will be some relaxation sustained stresses should be generated because the restrained strain case, but this also get relaxed due to the creep creep relaxation say to say that if you sustained loading if it is stress strain then there is a relaxation. So, this is the relaxation this is the relaxation due to creep this is the relaxation due to creep right this is the relaxation due to creep. Now tensile strength increases in this manner the moment tensile strength is less than this because shrinkage increases with time relaxation is also increasing with time, but time comes when actually this you know net tensile stress overtakes the tensile strength the cracks actually develop such a time. So, this can take some time, but normally all this crack cracks comes in within about month or two of the construction this is drying shrinkage cracks particularly not you know even in normal strength concrete this may be quite a bit of this could be there. Other kind of cracks that comes out of shrinkage could be seen in this diagram typical concrete cracks for example, this is k is fine crazy this is crazy this is called crazy you know this is called crazy crazy you can see very fine cracks surface cracks crazy crazy C E R S Z I N G crazy fine crazy the surface cracks this also comes because of shrinkage but D E F so this E this D where is D D E F so this is E and D is here D E and F is here these are shrinkage cracks. So, shrinkage cracks might appear like this this will be largely surface this is might look at the surface they might look like this, but if the section is thin you might get them through and through also. So, these are the shrinkage cracks actually A B C R plastic settlement cracks, but I think I will not discuss them because I am not really discussing the cracks here that is because of initial settlement you know as I said when bleed bleeding occurs, bleeding occurs the solid subsides and water has a tendency to come if the reinforcement is actually restricting the subsidence there will crack on top of it. So, this is a plastic settlement crack A B C you know that conscious where dimension change is occurring you might see this kind of crack anyway that is not of our interest much, but shrinkage cracks and crazy these are of our important you know interest at the moment there are other kind of cracks which I am not discussing that would be part of some other discussion. So, this is the importance of shrinkage and shrinkage now next look can look into thermal expansion which is almost a related matter to shrinkage and expansion right because this is also a kind of dimensional change and is the coefficient of thermal expansion basically you know is important because particularly for example, if I am using a reinforcement let us say steel of course, we do use and this coefficient of thermal expansion should be similar as the concrete fortunately it is with respect to steel they almost match and therefore, there will be no you know if there is a differential thermal expansion that will induce kind of tensile stress in one material with relative to the other or compression in the other one. So, depending upon what is a coefficient of expansion so, thermal coefficient of thermal expansion of concrete is important aggregate does not expand much right it will of course, depend upon aggregate type right and cement paste can expand aggregate expansion coefficient is different than that of the paste and it has got a kind of restraining effect. So, stiffness of this modulus of elasticity are different therefore, one issue is coefficient of thermal expansion other is a modulus of elasticity. So, next effect is you know it is actually alpha delta t is a alpha is a coefficient of expansion is a alpha is a coefficient of expansion which is length change per unit length. So, this will be kind of a strain this will be the kind of strain and stress induced would be it would depend upon stress this is the strain and stress induced alpha is a coefficient of thermal expansion and stress induced will depend upon the modulus of elasticity. Stress is multiplied by E actually this multiplied by E will be the stress induced on to the other material. So, if it induces tensile strain in the concrete system then it would actually cause cracking. So, it depends upon aggregate type as I said and aggregate content aggregate content coefficient of thermal expansion of concrete varies within this and steel is also somewhere there you know 14 13 14 11 depending upon type of steel they are also within this range. So, coefficient of thermal expansion generally varies this the factors those effect are actually moisture content strongly affects moisture content and also the you know the volume of aggregate because you can see from this expression this is the thermal expansion of concrete this is the thermal expansion of paste paste and aggregate this is the thermal coefficient of thermal expansion of aggregate this is the volume of aggregate g is the volumetric aggregate content and k p is the stiffness ratio paste and concrete. So, modulus of elasticity of the paste to aggregate. So, this is is also a function of this. So, these two factors the modulus of elasticity fraction volume and paste aggregate expansion coefficient all this actually affects the coefficient of thermal expansion of concrete you know coefficient of thermal expansion of concrete. So, this is an empirical sort of equation. So, this is this what it is another factor which strongly affects is a moisture content or relative humidity moisture content or relative humidity it depends upon you know like moisture content affects most of the properties of concrete system because you know the like thermal properties particularly because if you look at thermal conductivity conductivity when you put in moisture actually air is being replaced by air gets replaced by moisture itself air gets replaced by moisture itself. Now, properties of air and water is quite different and therefore, whenever there is a moisture or you know the moisture content of the concrete changes most of the properties changes. So, in a relative humidity and temperature again temperature also affects the coefficient of thermal expansion. So, relative humidity let us look at it now it seems that when you have a moisture relative humidity somewhere around 60 percent or so somewhere around 60 70 percent or so coefficient of thermal expansion is maximum when it is saturated it is somewhat less it will depend upon stiffness it will depend upon stiffness and stiffness of the when is saturated of course, the expansion gets reduced. It will depend upon besides that you know when it is actually relative humidity saturated the stiffness also would change stiffness of the system will also change because you know as we discussed earlier the absorbed water actually changes the properties of the gel gel itself. So, depending upon the relative humidity coefficient of expansion so, it is actually observed that coefficient of expansion is maximum at about 70 percent relative humidity. So, most important properties which are there are the aggregate content modulus of elasticity of aggregate modulus of elasticity of the paste and paste thermal coefficient of expansion and which is again governed by relative humidity or moisture content and also dependent on temperature. So, also dependent on temperature. So, it is of course, there is some sort of you know some sort of a observed experimental results relative humidity 100 percent coefficient of expansion is something of this kind and as as my temperature at of course, it depends upon minus 20 at low temperature. Now, this is more or less water will be mobile you know in this although the properties of gel water is different it is not same as free water it do not be like free water getting frozen this may not get frozen at all, but properties are different. But, as the temperature increases close to 0 degree centigrade this is lower at 100 percent relative humidity, but at higher temperature which are important for us this could be important if you are looking at the frost action, but as far as we are concerned in Indian scenario temperature will be higher than this and this temperature does not have effect. So, low temperature has got some effect and this effect depends upon again relative humidity. So, at 90 percent humidity you can see the results are quite different, but as at high temperature these are more or less similar these are more or less you know the values are more or less similar. So, this is what effects the this is what effects the you know this what actually effects the coefficient of thermal expansion of concrete system coefficient of you know coefficient of you know coefficient of you know coefficient of you know coefficient of expansion of concrete system. So, I think we have looked into so far we have looked into so far try to understand shrinkage a little bit from the fundamentals. So, in the process what we looked into we looked into you know we try to derive basically Kelvin's equation and then we have tried to explain how surface tension properties can result in compression in the skeleton because of the surf you know nature of the water itself. Then we looked into as the drying occurs it occurs from larger pores to the finer pores and in the process you know it to the exert pressure into the skeleton and therefore, this compression will result in drying this is what one issue looked into. Then we looked into swelling mechanism because of the adsorbed water how the surface tension of the gel itself will change and how it is related to shrinkage when you have moisture when you have moisture you know withdrawal or drying and also by the way we just also explain that why compressive strength of concrete is lower when moisture results all right of course tensile strength increases tensile strength of dry specimen is more that is because there will be no shrinkage cracks that is we talked earlier and then we looked into various measurement method and there relevance of shrinkage in cracking we tried to look into types of crack and lastly we looked into thermal expansion of thermal expansion of concrete system the factors those effects of the thermal expansion. So, with this actually we complete the module 7 where we have discussed largely about creep shrinkage and related phenomena and try to also understood the creep behavior as much as possible and the shrinkage behavior of concrete and cement waste material. So, I think that with that it finishes our discussion on module 7 thank you. === Lecture 29 Transcript === Welcome to module 8. In this module, we shall be looking into durability of concrete. So, in the lecture 1, we will talk about some fundamental concepts. Look at the degradation process. Some definitions actually in the beginning, then some degradation process and some attacks. In this one, we look into particularly, we look into durability and service like definition and degradation process in which we look into actually, we look into first of all, we look into sea water attack, sulfate attack, sea water attack, acid and we look at alkali aggregate reaction. Alchali aggregate reaction. So, the 4 things we will look at are sulfate attacks, sea water attack, acid attack and alkali aggregate reactivity. So, this is the 4 things we will look into in today's lecture 1 and lecture 1, we will look into this ones. So, what is durability? Well, concrete structure may remain stable and safe against load unless deteriorated by environment. You know load carrying capacity is one thing. For example, a person may be able to withstand a lot of load, carry a lot of load, load. So that is actually stable against load. But same person may be attacked by some virus, virus attack and may be bedridden. Not able to do its function. So, even though strong able to carry a lot of load, even though it is strong and able to carry a lot of load may be affected by virus. So, therefore, environment and this virus comes from where it comes from environment, it comes from environment, it comes from environment, it comes from the environment. It comes from the environment. So, load carrying is one thing, but remaining unaffected by viruses, something different. It is a very related concrete durability or durability of actually structural systems or materials actually relates to the effect by the environment. That is what we are saying, unless deteriorated by the environment, unless deteriorated by the environment. So, durability is concrete structure may remain stable and safe against load, but it may not still may be safe, but may not remain, may not be able to do its function, may not be able to perform its function if attacked by deteriorated by the environment, if deteriorated by the environment. So, that is what we are talking of. So, the concrete structure shall survive and serve its function during the period of intended design life. So, durability is related to this actually, the concrete structure shall survive and serve its function during the period of intended design life. Function means if it is a bridge should be able to carry the load. If it is a building should be able to provide the shelter, the structural system in the concrete structural system, it is part of the building, then it should be able to provide the shelter, support everything. So, that is the function actually. So, it should be able to carry the function, but then you cannot rule out periodic or occasional maintenance and special repair, because this cannot be ruled out, because the environment may affect. So, when there is not able to perform its function, not able to perform its function as desired, then you may have to do periodic or occasional maintenance and special repairs. So, define durability. Deurability of the structure, durability of the structure, component etcetera is its capability to maintain minimum performance level. Over a specified time when exposed to degradation environment, so durability of the structure or component etcetera is its capability to maintain a minimum performance level. Over a specified period of time when exposed to degradation environment. So, if it is in a degradation environment, it should be able to perform its function for a specified time and that is what is durability related to durability. So, durability is defined in this manner and performance are the measures of fulfillment of functions, that is what by definitions. Performance varies with time and degradation is defined as a gradual decrease of performance with time. So, this two are related. Degradation is gradual decrease of performance and if you are able to maintain the performance, it is accelerated to durability. So, it is capability to maintain this performance in the environment, it is capability to maintain this environment, but degradation would cause actually performance, it will cause decrease in performance. So, therefore, it is kind of a qualitative statement that we maintain. That is a qualitative statement that we may, all these are qualitative statement. It should be able to maintain a performance, how do we define this performance, but we said for a given life, given time. So, it is given time, you know we defined it as a given time. So, for a period, you know specified time when exposed to degradation environment. Therefore, it is linked to life or time. Now, we can understand concrete will not be maintained in free, it will degrade, why it will degrade? Because all those material or system that is produced at the expense of energy by spending energy, you know, they will have a tendency to dissipate that energy. For example, lifting a body up, lifting a body up, lifting a body up to this level, I increase it potential to MGH. So, it will have a tendency to come down, it will have a tendency to come down. So, if you give some energy, MGH increases potential, it will try to come down. Now, this is of course, mechanical, you know, this is a gravity potential I have increased, but when I am producing a material with the expense of energy, actually, you know, I am actually energy is input to it, I am increasing its chemical energy or chemical potential, its chemical potential or gives free energy and so on so forth. So, it is chemical potential actually I am increasing. So, when I increase the chemical potential, it will have a tendency to react and dissipate energy, you know, get involved in an exothermic reaction and dissipate that energy. Now, cement is produced with considerable amount of energy and therefore, cement reacts with water and dissipates some of this energy, but all the energy is not dissipated, it is not 100 percent stable material. And it been stable material, CHS would not have reacted with anything else and CHS would have been available in nature. The material those you get in the nature, let us say quads sand, it is available in nature, it has dissipated all its energy and come to a stable state, crystalline stable state, you know, molecules are this perfect minimum potential level. So, whatever materials, whichever material you produce with the expense of energy has a tendency to dissipate this and therefore, cement concrete is no exception, cement concrete is no exception and therefore, it will not be maintenance free. So, it will have a tendency to react, concrete will some component of concrete particularly cement system, cement hydrate system that has not dissipated its energy fully and therefore, it will have a tendency to react. It is actually if it is fine powder, then you know like after abrasion natural process, fine sand, very fine sand, large sizes also has got to be reduced. So, all the fracture you know it has dissipated by fracture all energy possible and come to the final size, that is actually a stable material. Rocks may not be all the time stable compared to of course, fine powder of the same material because it will have, it can still break into new surfaces and dissipate some more energy and create new surface, you know, dissipate some fracture energy and create new surfaces. So, aggregates some of the aggregates some energy might be locked in aggregates, but not necessarily mainly the cement paste and cement hydrate system that has a tendency to, it is you know it has a somewhat higher chemical potential and would actually tend to dissipate there given in conducive condition. So, cement paste steel also you know any many other material all materials that we produce with the expense of energy will have a tendency to dissipate. So, therefore, cement concrete is the exception and it also degrades with time, it will react and degrades with time. All reaction may not be dangerous, but of the reaction is causing is creating a problem as far as its functional performance is concerned, it is not able to maintain its functional performance then we will call it degradation. So, functional performance should be reduced. So, you see the degradation if I kind of plot it along this direction to start with you know it is 0 here and then with time it degradation increases and this somewhere we define a limit up to which I cannot beyond which I cannot accept, I cannot accept the degradation any more that limit is I call a serviceable limit because it will not you know we are talking of elements not the structure as a whole. As a whole we will never deteriorate at all together very rare cases it would mostly part of the structure or one of the elements will actually degrade, degradation you will see in elements concrete will degrade in some of the elements only and when it degrades the element the element might reach its serviceable limit. For example, I might define those serviceable limit I mean which I cannot tolerate say deflection large deflection usually the cracks or spalling. So, when it cracks as appear at certain level I may say that well it is not no more acceptable to me the size of the cracks and thus my serviceable limit. So, degradation causes those cracks to appear and when it reaches this I call this as a service life and service life when I am talking I am talking of elements you know not of the whole building. So, it is of the elements of the element concrete element I mean degradation normally do not cause failure of the structure unless you have allowed it to go through. So, a component might show degradation and cracking might results now one element a beam in a large building shows exhibits crack it does not mean building is going to immediately fall down. So, all you can do is you can repair it essentially and do some maintenance work and it will come back to its original you know it can you can bring it back to its original state. So, this may not most of the degradation do not lead to immediate failure and when you are talking of life service life we are talking with respect to element I am talking in the context of concrete you can imagine even in a steel bridge trust bridge an element shows some cracking because of fatigue may be over the years reversal of stresses it shows a fatigue crack fracture. So, you remove that element put in another one back the bridge is still locate can last for longer period. So, such kind of long term durability or one element shows some kind of rusting. So, you remove that element and then put in another one. So, this you know it you can repair it basically, but during in the meantime you have to see that it remains stable because one critical element if you remove it may cause secondary reversal that is other issues. But, all I am trying to say is with respect to concrete when we talk of service life we are not talking of the whole structure you are talking of only an element where feasible crack or something is there appear. Now, this is the way we can actually quantify the durability also. So, you know we said the time up to which it maintains the functions it is able to perform you know and able to do its function properly. So, service life is in a way quantification of the durability all right service life is in a way quantification of the durability all right. So, this is related to the durability. Now, maintain a policy if I look at it you know this as I said with time with time the degradation will progress, degradation will progress. Initially there may not be any degradation and then degradation may start and this is my serviceability limit and this is largely related to maintenance policies and repair of structures. Decreations are largely to maintenance policy and you know repair of structures concrete structures, but the cost involved could be very very large. So, because there are other costs such as disruption cost you stop a bridge there is a cost involved in that. Therefore, we would not like would like a maintenance free service life maintenance free intended design life is that light for which I have designed the structure. I have taken the load the wash load that can come during the intended design life and the structure should last during that period and I prefer that there is no repair or maintenance during that period of time because otherwise it will involve cost. But, supposing it happens also then this is what the deterioration or degradation will it reaches this limit you know and I might do a normal normally you know this is the acceptable limit, but I might do at this stage itself I might do some repair and bring it back and go on doing this repair again and again this could be one of the strategies, but a better strategy and this is the intended design life of the structure itself intended design life of the structure itself. So, I can have several service life of element within the intended design life and I can go on repairing the original system itself, but I can do a better maintenance or better repair such that it reaches straight away the intended design life. So, there can be different maintenance policies and durability of concrete is related to this issues actually durability of concrete is related to this issues all right. So, maintenance policies are related to this. So, degradation process is in concrete we now digress or rather go into the material with discussion that we have related to durability right due to the degradation deterioration occurs deterioration occurs of the structure or the element occurs because of degradation. So, degrades degradation is going from functional performance reduces and therefore, the structure deteriorates. So, deterioration degradation this confusion should not be there. Now, we are talking of degradation processes by which actually structure a concrete element will get deteriorated. So, sulphate attack is one of them, CO water attack is other, ac data is other. Concrete is an alkaline material or cement paste cement hydrate is an alkaline material because calcium hydroxide is produced, calcium silicate hydrates are produced. So, they are generally you know alkaline in nature relatively alkaline in nature and therefore, they do not get attacked by everything it is relatively stable compared to many other let us say manmade material which can you know. So, all manmade material do not get attacked by the same mechanism by the same agents. So, sulphate can attack cement based materials or concrete, see water can attack the cement based material and concrete and ac it can attack the cement based materials because it is alkaline. These two carbonation and chloride in guess they are not degradation process for concrete per se, but they are problem for reinforced concrete and pristure concrete because they can cause rebar reinforcement steel reinforcement corrosion. So, carbonation and chloride in guess leads to rebar corrosion. Other one is alkali aggregate reaction this is another kind of deterioration involves aggregate themselves this involves cement paste and frost action involves everything of course, not the reinforcement. So, we look into first this one and then look into this sometime later on we can look into this one after of course, this discussion because this is very very important good lot of structures all over the world are affected by this one and maximum cost you know for repair is involved with this particular one. But one thing important there are many deterioration process, but all involves actually chemical reaction and this is most often presence of moisture is you know it is absolutely must for most of this reaction to occur very rarely try concrete get affected by anything. So, therefore, it is very important that we keep this out if you keep this out of the concrete system then it will not you know it is durability will be infinite right and many cases of course, in guess of aggressive chemical from outside takes place. So, some cases you can model them to diffusion processes because if the process if the process is of diffusion coming in you know diffusion will define this somewhat sometime later on. So, if the process some process can be actually model through diffusion. So, but what we got to understand this is most important moisture is most important if you can keep moisture out all problems are solved and in some other cases other aggressive chemical from outside it is mostly aggressive chemical from outside that come and attract the concrete and causes degradation of the material. So, let us look at first the sulphate atom. So, sulphates reacts with calcium hydroxide and try calcium aluminate and forms two compounds you know form compounds like it train jite and gypsum this you have seen earlier formation of a train jite you have seen earlier when you talked of setting of concrete remember we had a little bit of gypsum you know calcium sulphate we had a little bit of gypsum you had to the cement in order to control the you know setting process of cement cement. And c3 has a high affinity for sulphate or gypsum. So, if you have some sulphate other kind of sulphates a sodium sulphate is available in the ground water and your is concrete is in contact to the ground water or similar other situations where it is in contact with sodium sulphate it will react with sodium sulphate or potassium sulphate or similar sulphate you know alkali sulphates are most soluble. So, there will be again it has to work it has to it works you know it reacts in the solution phase. So, therefore, they are readily soluble and they can react with calcium hydroxide forming calcium sulphate and sodium hydroxide you know forming calcium sulphate and sodium hydroxide right. Now, calcium sulphate is a train jite I sorry calcium sulphate is something you know in the there in the gypsum you remember it was calcium sulphate to H2 is the gypsum. So, calcium sulphate can easily react with calcium aluminate hydrate you know this is way of writing calcium sulphate if you remember we need to adopt cement chemistry we said S bar stands for SO 3. So, C stands for CAO therefore, C S bar stands for calcium sulphate. So, calcium sulphate reacts with try calcium aluminate hydrate forming a complex sort of alumino alumino sulphate calcium alumino sulphate calcium alumino sulphate with so much of water and calcium hydroxide and this are a train jite this is a train jite this is a train jite. Now, this a train jite when formed during the hydration process or initial setting process there is no problem because the volume expansion this material it occupies more volume than the reactants these are the reactants this is the reactants and this is the volume of the other reactants. So, volume of this one V of this one is less than the V of the product V of reactant is less than the volume of the product. So, therefore, there will be a kind of it will try to expand but this expansion is not a problem when when it is actually you know volume of product is greater than volume of reactant. So, it is not a problem when it is occurring in plastic paste because this can accommodate this expansion this can accommodate this expansion and this a train jite is of course, converted into monosalphate and so on so forth which is stable but this can expand but here this expansion in hardened concrete cannot be you know it cannot be it is cannot withstand it. So, if you have hardened concrete and if something is trying to expand from inside something is trying to expand from inside you know something is trying to expand it will push actually it will push the hardened concrete push it push it and normally popping out from the surface will result. So, therefore, disruption of the concrete will occur because of sulphate because of sulphate attack because of sulphate attack. So, disruption you know popping out could be occurring. So, this is what happens when you have any other sulphate other than magnesium sulphate coming into the system instead of you know sodium sulphate comes potassium sulphate comes they react with calcium hydroxide forming calcium sulphate and sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide. Now, potassium hydroxide sodium hydroxide do not create much of a problem to the concrete because they are anyway there in the system as well. Well, L K L is are there but magnesium sulphate when it comes it of course, reacts with the calcium hydroxide when it is contract with the concrete but it forms calcium sulphate but from forms also magnesium hydroxide. Magnesium hydroxide of course, can react you know can form magnesium sulphate but that is not the case usually. This this this calcium sulphate of course, will lead to formation of etringi but problem is CHS is unstable in the presence of magnesium hydroxide. Calcium silkate hydrate is unstable in an environment of magnesium hydroxide is quite stable in a calcium hydroxide environment, magnesium hydroxide environment it is to form this magnesium silicate hydrate and this magnesium silicate hydrate does not have the cementing property, this does not have the cementing property as our ordinary cement it does not have cementing property like our you know binding property does not have binding property like our orderly for our cement or calcium silicate hydrates and this can result in further decomposition of the concrete this can result in further decomposition of the concrete. So, what you see normally you will see white crystals of gypsum cracking and spalling. So, one thing important from this discussion so far is that magnesium sulphate is more dangerous than sodium sulphate, potassium sulphate. If calcium sulphate comes in contact with the concrete well there is no need for formation of calcium hydroxide to calcium sulphate it will straight away react with the tri calcium eliminate hydrate. So, you see actually white crystals of gypsum cracking and spalling in all cases in case of sulphate atom all right. So, that is sulphate attack the lot of react people you know there is some lot of research goes on on sulphate attack. It is generally comes from the ground water, ground water you know contaminated with sulphate and foundations could be affected by them by the sulphate. White powder of gypsum together with white with powder formation of scratching are symptoms of sulphate. So, you will see white powder and if you scratch the concrete you know you just scratch the concrete if this is your concrete surface and you scratch it you will find that materials are coming out. So, on scratching material will just simply lost from the surface because the expansion is actually we can the concrete straight away and sometime later on it itself will come out. So, that is that is the symptom of sulphate attack. Now, how do you reduce it down? If you were you know if you foresee the sulphate attack then lower water cement ratio is a good solution. It improves the sulphate resistance and its primary protection measures. So, basically you have to reduce down the water cement ratio what it why what it is the sulphate will not be able to penetrate into the concrete. You know as we said moisture has to come in the other material has to come into the concrete. So, sulphate will not be able to penetrate into the concrete and that is how it saves it saves. Low c3a cement sulphate resisting cement remember we talked about sulphate resisting cement when you are talking of type of cement. This has got c3a content restricted low c3a content blended cement of course, cement with pozzolana also improves sulphate resistance. Why? First of all what it would do is it would reduce down it would reduce down the you know it would reduce down the c3a active c3a content because cement will be 70 percent let us say 30 percent is my flyers. So, obviously c3a gets reduced by 30 percent itself if it was 80 percent it will now become 5.6 percent. If I am using about 50 percent slag in the blended cement that is your blast furnace you know Portland slag cement. So, you will have now 8 percent c3a was there originally now it will become 4 percent c3. So, there is a dilution effect straight away and that improves the sulphate resistance beside normally pozzolanec or blended cement has got better micro structure them solidify the whole thing and therefore, they improve the sulphate resistance they improve the sulphate resistance. So, this sulphate attack you know and beyond that of course, so using sulphate resisting cement blended cement low water cement ratio these are usually the strategies against sulphate attack provided you can see them. Is there is there but Indian scenario less common then let us say reinforcement corrosion reinforcement corrosion is one of the major problem. Sea water attack well sea water contains sulphate and it also contains chloride sodium chloride. So, sea water contains sulphates sulphates are there magnesium sulphate calcium sulphate they are there and one difference is that it train it and gypsum are soluble in chloride solution. So, if you have sodium chloride solution which is the sea water that train it that would form within the concrete and gypsum those will form within the concrete they will get dissolved. So, therefore, there is no scope of actually expansion and cracking. So, the action is slightly different although you have same sulphate but the action is different because now the sodium you know I mean the chloride solution will dissolve this at train site but results in what leaching. So, therefore, sea beer leaching could be there if sulphate attack is prominent, dissolution of gypsum and at train site would result in actually very porous concrete. So, if you have very porous concrete now more water more sea water can go in. So, crystallization of salt in the pores can occur and this can cause expansion and cracking. So, some salt pores will it will become more it will become porous it will become porous this skeleton will become porous and therefore, more material can go in solidify there and as the crystallization of you know solid occurs within this can cause expansion and cracking but major problem comes from the reinforcement corrosion because the chloride that goes in that can initiate corrosion we will discuss about that sometime later on but it is the chloride which is more dangerous because this can initiate river corrosion. So, sea in the sea water environment river corrosion is more important. Therefore, one you know sulphate attack directly may not affect it may not cause cracking but it makes it porous the skeleton becomes porous and therefore, more chloride can get and it can initiate the corrosion faster. So, indirectly it will actually helps the reinforcement corrosion. Blended cement performs best in sea water lower water cement ratio and quality of concrete of course, is other metal material protection. Now, why blended cement you see remember in sea water you need protection against both chloride as well as sulphate. Now, it has been observed that the penetration of chloride or you know the ingress of chloride is not restricted by sulphate resisting cement. Sulfate resisting cement does not perform very well in a chloride environment because chloride can still penetrate in. In fact, chloride will see that chloride binding becomes lower if you it is sulphate resistance because sea 3 a helps in chloride binding or sea you know sea trichelstium element it hydrates they help in chloride binding the chloride chemically and sulphate resisting cement. So, if you reduce on the sea 3 a action of chloride may become more pronounced. While in blast furnace slag cement this effect is not seen. So, this performs very well both against chloride as well as sulphate. So, in sea water a blast furnace slag cement would perform much better then of course, the sulphate resisting cement sulphate resisting cement sulphate resisting cement. So, sea water attract is it is different. Now, magnesium sulphate also can be present in sea water and there as I as we told it attacks the skeleton of the concrete itself it you know it attacks the skeleton of the concrete itself. So, in sea water situation magnesium sulphate can be more dangerous they can attack the CHS and there the where more CHS is there basic structure can still be attacked by magnesium sulphate you know magnesium sulphate. So, that is that is more dangerous one has to really looked into. Now, lot of research are going on because with the advent of high power from high strength we are using we are trying to form more CHS in the skeleton replacing calcium hydroxide as much as possible and calcium hydroxide of course, is vulnerable you have sodium sulphate because it will form calcium sulphate. But CHS more means less calcium hydroxides. So, it is good if the concrete is exposed to sodium sulphate or calcium sulphate. Magnesium sulphate high CHS may not be a solution. So, lot of research are going on and it requires possible more research to look into this issue. So, next we can look into AC data concrete is alkaline, Portland cement environment is alkaline therefore, it will be attacked by AC. So, AC comes from where sulphate dioxide carbon dioxide and such other fumes if presence of in presence of moisture for example, you have H 2 O plus SO 2 will form actually H 2 SO 3. So, sulphuric acid which might get oxidized to you know which might form actually H 2 SO 4 you know H 2 SO 4 in presence of water etcetera etcetera. So, it might form actually it might form H 2 SO 4 which is which is stable actually. Similarly, carbon dioxide plus water forms H 2 CO 3 by carbonic acid with carbonic acid. Now, this acids can react with calcium hydroxide. So, this can react with calcium hydroxide. This can react with calcium hydroxide. So, acids can react with calcium hydroxide, acids can react with calcium hydroxide, right. Acid can react with calcium hydroxide and this can result in acid can result in you know it can result in reaction of acid can result in reaction of acid can result in reaction of reaction of acid can result in actually degradation of the concrete because calcium hydroxide reacting with acid calcium hydroxide reacting with acid would form salt and you know this can this can result in formation of this can result in formation of products which would result in degradation. So, acid can attack concrete acid can attack concrete acid can attack concrete acid can attack concrete right. Now, pH below 6.5 attack initiates and it is severe if pH is 4.5. So, concentration of the acid matters sulphuric acid I mean the formation of sulphur as acid or similar one or CO2 carbonic acid if it if it concrete comes in contact with pH less than 6.5 attacks initiate and it is very severe in 4.5. So, it is actually caused lot of loss of the material from the concrete result another acid attack would be because of H 2 O reacting with H 2 S which can actually form sulphuric acid which can again form actually sulphuric acid. So, this is seen in you know this is seen in H 2 O dissolved in moisture films in C words is oxidized to sulphuric acid. So, H 2 S H 2 O plus oxygen in the atmosphere it is dissolved film it can actually results in formation of sulphuric acid. So, sulphuric acid you know this can result in again reaction of the similar kind as we have discussed. Now, attack by dissolving and removal of part of the cement hydrates normally lives weak mass. So, that is what it is it is actually causes kind of leaching. So, it will attack calcium hydroxide and in calcium hydroxide and it will be removed and if it is this mass becomes weak and in you know in this lower alkaline environment lower alkaline environment CHS itself may not be as stable as it was otherwise and it is not actually it is porous also at the same time because calcium hydroxide has been removed by you know by formation of salts. Normally as it lives a kind of weak mass and this weak mass gradually tend to pop out gradually tend to pop out. Reduction of calcium hydroxide by treatment with sodium silicate helps in formation of calcium silicate and reduction of calcium hydroxide because it is this link is calcium hydroxide the link is calcium hydroxide. This is what reacts with any kind of acid. This is what reacts with any kind of acids therefore, if I remove if I know that there is a possibility of acid attack I can actually reduce down this calcium hydroxide by treatment with sodium silicate and calcium silicate would be there and this is reduced on the calcium hydroxide and potential acid data potential acid attack it can reduce on the potential acid attack you know potential acid data can be reduced alright. So, surface treatment and coating also reduces the risk of such a time even even you know even even water pure water 7 pH water you know distilled water they have a tendency to actually leech out cause leaching from the concrete. So, concrete close to neutral or less than neutral that is acidic water has a tendency to actually become more porous and in the process they can be they can form weak mass. In fact, you might see white crystals of calcium sulphate in the sewer line between the maximum water and the minimum water line and weak mass of concrete in the gradually gives rise to porous popping out of the surface concrete or surface concrete laws. So, coating etcetera etcetera there reduces the risk of such attack and blended cement they improve acid resistance blended cement improves the acid resistance because low permeability nothing can penetrate. So, blending cement gives you a much better my microstructure and therefore, they you know nothing is able to penetrate. Elkily aggregate reaction this is another kind of degradation process of you know concrete and concrete deteriorates deteriorates with alkali aggregate reaction. Now, some aggregates exhibit this not all aggregate aggregate aggregate will actually exhibit this some aggregate aggregate aggregate which has got active silica they can react to the alkali present in the cement resulting in alkali silica reaction. So, some of the aggregates not all some aggregate active silica constituent in aggregate when present can react with alkali present in the cement resulting in alkali silica reaction. The relate relate reactive forms of silica of course, some of them I have just note down opals, chalcedon, tridamite and there are many others and they occur in many rocks you know opal quartz for example. So, they occur in many other rocks as well. Now, sodium hydroxide and potassium oxide in cement they form their hydroxyl ion and then react to the silicate silica silicious materials forming alkali silicate gel forming alkali silicate gel. So, actually sodium oxide sodium oxide sodium oxide sodium oxide can react with some SIO forming silicate gel silicate gel. This gel can actually adsorb water this is gelatinous structure and can absorb water this gelatinous structures you know they can absorb water. So, water can absorb and then they actually occupy more volume. So, they can absorb water and occupy more volume. So, sodium oxide potassium oxide in cement form their hydroxide and forming silicate gels and then silicate gels can occupy more volume this silicate gels can occupy actually more volume. So, they attract actually water they attract water right by absorption or by osmosis and tend to increase the volume and tend to increase the volume and this volume you know this can because because of the you know this gel can the solution concentrations could be different concentration could be difference and thereby by osmosis they can actually attract water and once they attract the water they tend to increase in volume expansion you know this volume expansion of this confined gel tends to exert pressure around to the surrounding paste leading to expansion and cracking and disruption of paste leading to expansion and cracking and disruption of the paste right into expansion and disruption of the paste. So, expansion is due to hydraulic pressure generated by osmosis and sualing pressure of reaction product both because reaction sualing pressure of the reaction you know sualing pressure will come because gel with water this product will try to expand but at the same time there will be hydraulic pressure the material within you know this if there is a concentration difference the tendency of the solute would be to move from higher concentration to lower concentration and if you apply a pressure at the solvent level at the lower concentration and you will see that this is not actually occurring. In other words when there is a concentration difference there is a pressure there is a kind of pressure that exists. So, if there is a concentration difference that causes a kind of pressure and this pressure is nothing but osmosis osmotic pressure and this kind of pressure that is that would exist within the gel and outside and also the sualing pressure of the reaction product that would have a tendency to cause disruption of the concrete and that is a alkali aggregate reaction that is alkali aggregate reaction you know and this is the kind of reaction you can think of this is one of the reaction shown calcium hydroxide reacting with silic acid forming calcium ion and this acid plus 2 water and this is then this together forming this product and water. So, this product is a gelatinous has got a gelatinous structure C a H 2 S I O 4 this is got a gelatinous structure and this gelatinous structure it can absorb water and swell and result in formation of the result in formation of the you know result in formation of the gelatinous material and expansion causing cracking typically they might look like this this is what we call as map cracking this is what we call as map cracking you know the structures you can see the cracks all around the places all around the places. So, this is called map cracking actually cracks can appear late from larger radical every particle. So, every from the larger aggregate particle you may not see the crack in first 5 10 years of a service and they might come much much later and in an extreme case it will simply fall of also fall of also. So, some of the other examples of alkali aggregate reaction the structure is something of this kind something of this kind alkali aggregate reaction will be something of this kind all right you know there is there can be there can be formation of formation of large scale cracks in the system large scale cracks in the system it will look something like this it will look something like this is a real case where the alkali aggregate reaction is caused this particular structure you know it is also splintering out practically everything is going out everything is popping out. So, this is an example of alkali aggregate reaction some more example now what happens you have the aggregate and you can see around the surrounding the aggregate you can see this is the original aggregate and surrounding the aggregate there are white gel formation this is also similarly it shows this was the original aggregate there are white gel formation all around it. So, you can see the gel you know surrounding each aggregate if you look at the aggregate you will find white kind of gel formation that is occurred this is a broken piece of the aggregate you know concrete and from this you can find gel formation occurring and in all these stages you might see crack find cracks of this kind and later stages this will result in formation of this kind of a you know as a complete crack all around the crack concrete crack all around the places formation of complete crack all around the places and structural disintegrate remember this does not occur you know so, this is the concrete complete crack in the later stages remember this does not occur in the beginning it takes at least 5 10 years time in India, Hirakuth damage an example of you know it face this problem. So, normally aggregates are tested prior to their use aggregates are tested prior to their use and then you try to eliminate out the kind of you know kind of aggregate that can cause the aggregate alkali aggregate reaction. So, so far we talked of alkali silica reaction there is another kind I will just come that come to that later on prevention of moisture again is the most important because this reaction also takes place in presence of moisture this is reaction also takes place in presence of moisture the reaction that we showed it occurs only in presence of moisture if there is no moisture there will be no alkali aggregate reaction. So, even after alkali aggregate reaction is occurred if one can protect the structure from moisture, alkali aggregate reaction will not continue further right in the beginning if you are able to envisage that there will be alkali aggregate reaction moisture prevention becomes very important use of cement with low alkali content you know is low alkali content is important what you do is actually sodium oxide equivalent to use now sodium oxide potassium oxide their molecular weight differs right. So, molecular weight of potassium oxide and sodium oxides are different. So, therefore, when equivalent sodium oxide content would be multiplied the potassium oxide content by a factor I think it is 0.5 weight or something close to that. So, such that which is the ratio of molecular weight of the two. So, multiply by this by a factor and find out the sodium equivalent. So, if you use cement having less than 0.6 sodium oxide equivalent or even still lesser than that then chance of alkali aggregate reaction will be low use of ground granulated blast furnace slag or blended cement or fly ash they actually reduce the alkali aggregate reactivity. They alkali use the alkali aggregate reactivity you know. So, blended cement because 50% the alkali content will get reduced by 50% alkali is in the blast furnace slag or fly ash they do not contribute to alkali aggregate reaction. So, therefore, you know although they are present they do not contribute aggregate the situation. Therefore, using blended cement or fly ash directly or slag directly in the system helps in reducing down the alkali aggregate reaction use of Portland fly ash as I said you know pulverized fuel ash pulverized fuel ash or fly ash in the blended cement with alkali content of Portland cement not more than 3 kg per meter cube of concrete they do help and do not use aggregate potentially prone to AR. Now, how that is done? So, you do what is called first you do petrographic examination that is you know the geological origin of the aggregates are looked into by geological test looking under microscope and so on so forth identifying the mineralogical composition, accelerate fraction etcetera etcetera find out what is the mineralogical composition and those minerals which are potential Lee you know prone to alkali aggregate reaction you remove them. Normally say where construction is going on for years together and same aggregate has been used you will find this problem occurring because it is already proven aggregate but if you are using a new aggregate source one must do this test first do those petrographic examination and also do motor bar test motor ASTM motor bar test ASTM motor bar test motor bar test test to identify whether the aggregate is prone to alkali aggregate reaction. This you know this test motor bar test is done you make powder out of the concrete I mean powder out of the fine aggregate so, aggregate make powder make motor out of it and then test all right. So, find out the aggregates which are potentially potential potential potentially alkali aggregate reactive and do not use them if it is a new source. So, this is other way of prevention alkali aggregate expansion reducing admixtures are used for example, lithium compound lithium replaces alkali and products are not expansive you know lithium compounds are alkali aggregate expansion reducing admixtures. So, use this once and they can reduce down but best is to find out that aggregate is not alkali aggregate reaction but if you still think that you should be playing safer you can use this admixtures also use low cement low so alkali cement actually. Reaction between certain now alkali carbonate reaction this is important in some cases reaction between certain dolomite limestone aggregate aggregate and alkali of cement show similar kind of adverse effect and this is called alkali carbonate reaction. So, so far we looked at alkali silica reaction or alkali silicate reactions and this is actually alkali carbonate alkali carbonate reactions. Of course, this is relatively less frequent this is relatively less frequent. So, this phenomena is relatively less frequent all right. So, with this actually what you have looked into today we have looked into we have defined the durability and then we also defined service slide. We have defined we have talked about sulphate attract see water attract and a serious attract and we also looked into alkali aggregate reaction alkali aggregate reaction all right. We have looked into alkali aggregate reaction right and in all cases we have discussed what causes them what causes them and the how to actually mitigate. One common point in all kind of attract in concrete is essentially the presence of moisture. Some cases moisture and oxygen is also required for example, reinforcement corrosion, but most often it is a moisture and in all cases we have seen that one thing is we must keep the moisture out and if you can keep the moisture out no deterioration of concrete will occur actually. And one more thing in all cases we have seen low water cement ratio performs the job. So, when finally, we actually conclude or rather we end up summarize our the strategies for better durability and service life of concrete. We will see that low water cement ratio is a requirement because it is the permeation properties of concrete which is important because and low water cement ratio actually reduces on the permeability. So, this we conclude this lecture. Thank you. === Lecture 30 Transcript === Welcome to module 8 lecture 2. We will continue with durability of concrete and in this lecture we will look into frost action and introduce rebar corrosion reinforcement corrosion. So, essentially we will look at frost and we will introduce rebar corrosion today. Now, you know frost action of frost usually is more relevant to the cold countries, but in Indians of continent, Indian scenario the Himalayan areas are susceptible to frost action freezing and thawing and you know the problem of freezing and thawing can result in kind of deterioration of concrete. Now, water if present in the concrete can freeze at low temperature and you know the ice occupies more volume than the water. Now, presence of this you know freezing point of water is not fixed unless it is distilled water. We know that depression of freezing point occurs when you have got salts you know presence of salts actually lowers the freezing point, presence of salt lowers the freezing point, salt present lowers the freezing point, presence of salt lowers the freezing point and fine pores freezes at fine pores freezes at lower temperature. So, this is one issue, second issue is since the porosity pore sizes differ, salt concentration would differ at different location in the concrete, there is no single freezing point of water in concrete. Therefore, there is no single freezing point of water in concrete and in gel pores there will be hardly any freezing. So, in gel pores there will be no freezing, gel pores there will be no freezing no freezing occurs in gel pores. So, what it means Since even the concrete is saturated all you know and the temperature goes down freezing will not occur simultaneously in all the pores only in some pores freezing will occur depending depending upon the salt concentration size of the pore and of course how close you know they are proximity to the surface or freezing temperature. Now when freezing occurs freezing causes 9 percent volume increase and freezing occurs gradually because all will not all pores will not get you know water in all the pores will not get frozen in one go. So, there is a 9 percent volume increase there is a 9 percent volume increase. Now, this volume increase actually causes a kind of an excess pressure. So, the water in unfrozen capillary is subjected to hydraulic pressure by this expanding volume of ice. So, what you can look into is something like this you have the concrete the there the aggregates aggregates etcetera etcetera and then you have got pores of various kind interconnected system and so on. The water freezes in some of the pores water freezes in some of the pores the other pores are still free other pores are still free and the hydraulic pressure the hydraulic pressure in this you know hydraulic pressure hydraulic pressure in this pores would cause an outward pressure on to the concrete because this is this is frozen water this is just water which is unfrozen and since this is expanding and this is connected this will actually exert hydraulic pressure in the surrounding concrete matrix. So, as a result as a result there is internal pressure generate in this unduly pressure inside induces internal tensile stresses and there can be local failure. So, there can be local failure local failure could occur and when thawing occurs again and when thawing occurs this old space you know for example, if this was your pore space which actually because of hydraulic pressure cracks occurred in this manner when actually cracks you know cracks got expanded or something of this kind. Now, next time when next time when water freezes water lantern into this as well as into cracks as well as into the new cracks and freezing action will be there in this new cracks you know cracked or new newly formed a fissures or spaces again. So, in other words now this will exert more hydraulic pressure this will exert you know this this this will cause more hydraulic pressure into water where there are you know this is the water where the pores where so, this will exert more pressure because more pore space are available which are filled with ice. So, some spaces which were not earlier filled by water now get filled up by water and can get frozen again and some portion might get frozen again and if they get frozen then that will actually exert pressure outward and therefore, this process you know the cycle will continue cycle will continue. So, this cycles as it continues the process is you know repeated several time and then finally, the concrete damage to the concrete will occur finally, damage to the concrete will occur. So, that is the action of frost in on concrete this is the action of frost on concrete. So, when the additional additional mechanism when capillary becomes you know it becomes ice the vapor pressure reduces. So, when capillary pores once ice formation at occurred the vapor pressure will reduce. So, gel water will move to the capillary gel water will move to the capillary capillary. So, gel to capillary because you know ice has formed here the ice formation is occurred here. So, here ice has occurred. So, therefore, gel to water will move gel water will move from gel to capillary and then again it will get frozen and the hydraulic pressure will increase. So, this is a kind of a you know kind of a cyclic process a repeated repetitive process I mean it is sort of sort of cascading effect. First you have some gel formation I mean some ice formation in some of the capillaries resulting in excess hydraulic pressure causes cracking and next time those crack or fishers that has been created will again filled up by water and therefore, additional spaces now available more hydraulic pressure. And whenever there is a hydraulic you know when there are there is a ice formation in the capillaries the vapor pressure reduces and gel water moves to the capillaries and again this frozen freezes and therefore, you know kind of a cascading effect. And after number of cycles actually you will find that there is a kind of disruption of the concrete and so on so forth. Now, this other effect is when liquid water diminishes concentration of solute also increases and osmotic pressure increases adding to hydraulic pressure. So, therefore, concentration of the solute which changes you know basically as we said that solute concentration causes diffusion we will look into that a little bit more sometime later on. But right now we can we can just understand this for example, this phenomena will be something like this supposing I have I have a solute two tanks I have two tanks and there is a semi permeable membrane here and I have got water here distilled water and here also distilled water but with some sort of solute solution present in this. So, here I have got solution here the solvent after sometime you will find the concentration tend to be same after sometime the you find that you know after sometime one finds the concentration becomes same concentration becomes same. So, concentration becomes same concentration becomes same but supposing supposing supposing you know I put supposing I put a piston here instead I put a piston here I put a piston here I put a piston here you know and apply pressure it will remain same the concentration would not change concentration would not change concentration does not change if I apply pressure here through a piston. So, this pressure difference is you know is called os this you know this is this pressure which I have applied implies that there is a pressure difference existing between high concentration to low concentration and this is called osmotic pressure this is called osmotic pressure osmotic pressure you know and due to osmotic pressure solute moves from high concentration to low concentration high concentration to low concentration and in fact it can also be shown that the pressure by concentration is something you know it is proportional to R T. So, you in fact you pressure by concentration volume 1 by volume is the concentration. So, PV so it is follows almost the you know this pressure or sometime denoted by pi it follows the gas flow itself right. So, ideal gas flow itself so this this can be related you know so pressure the osmotic pressure can be related to the gas flow and so on so forth right. So, that is what it is. So, osmotic pressure the solute concentration being different it can cause actually an osmotic pressure and it can add to the hydraulic pressure. empty air voids are capillary so, in present can relieve this pressure. But, supposing I have got empty capillary so, empty voids which is not filled with water and then when hydro hydrostatic pressure is applied this get ruptured and the water can enter into this one and this can relieve some of this pressure. So, empty air voids if I present in the system it will cause relieving of the pressure release of the pressure and thereby you know the the disruption of the concrete or deterioration of concrete is controlled. So, extent of damage can be surface scaling to complete this integration as layers of ice are formed initiating from surface and progress through the depth. So, essentially it starts from the surface and penetrates inside and surface scaling sometime constant constant you know complete disintegration of the concrete from the surface and so on so forth. So, after certain number of cycles after now you know certain number of cycles. So, it does not occur in one cycle first freezing then thawing so, more water comes in next again freezing and disruption and again thawing so, further more water comes in after certain number of cycles over the years actually fine that surface concrete actually is coming out popping out or something like that disintegration is occurring. So, that is what is action of frost. If the concrete remains dry it is not vulnerable to force frost action because R H below 80 to 90 percent is highly resistant to frost action because water is not there what to freeze. So, if the relative humidity is less than 100 percent less than 90 percent vapor pressure only vapor should be there and it will not freeze since vapor should be there it will not freeze. So, dry concrete is not vulnerable to frost action very very important dry concrete is not vulnerable to frost action is not vulnerable to frost action. So, therefore, again we see if we keep water out everything is fine if I can keep water out everything is fine. So, therefore, frost resistance concrete one way is to keep it dry but that may become not that may not be possible all the time. But what you can do there is another issue we said if there are empty pore space not filled with water where water can enter during you know during the freezing to relieve the hydraulic pressure right that some or other would be able to extend the freezing and throwing number number of cycles of freezing and throwing and the durability of the concrete increase in other words frost resistant resistance of the concrete will increase. So, deliver it air entrainment in low water cement ratio concrete now low water cement ratio concrete will actually allow less water into it less water increase in less less water increase and if I have air entrainment now what air entrainment will do it will actually kind of if this is your concrete creates create a sort of isolated small pore system spherical this well distributed small pore system air entrainment air and crane concrete. So, there well distributed fine pores but closed pores well distributed fine pores but closed pores now this pores initially are dry not filled with water. Now, once hydrostatic pressure hydraulic pressure inside the capillary is increase you know this pore boundary might get ruptured and water enters there. Now, as the water enters pressure is released and therefore, surrounding concrete is is remains intact or unaffected surrounding concrete remains unaffected this concrete remains unaffected this concrete this concrete remains unaffected you know concrete here will remain unaffected. So, deliver it air entrainment actually increases the frist of life you know presence of deliberately entrain well distributed air voids adjacent to water filled capillaries allows water to flow into them and relieve pressure. So, that is the idea adjacent to the water filled capillaries allows water to flow into them and relieves pressure and relieves pressure. So, pressure is relieved actually. So, therefore, the skeleton or the matrix solid matrix solid skeleton remains unaffected you know. So, therefore, it can last but then the deliberate air entrain air entrain voids which are there once the water enters there that becomes part of the interconnected pore system. So, next thawing cycle during the next thawing the water will penetrate into it and then again it is also part of the whole system. But all the air voids will not be filled in in one go. So, some will get actually filled in by water they will come into the permeable or interconnected permeable pore space. But some will still remain for the next cycle and for the next cycle and so on so forth. So, therefore, number of cycles then air entrain concrete can withstand is much higher than non air entrain concrete and this can be seen from this diagram. You see when temperature is going down this is the lower temperature, temperature lower temperature lower temperature temperature temperature is lower. Thus, thermal contraction of the concrete and if thermal contraction would have continued after 0 degree centigrade it would have gone like this parallel to this. But what happens is if I look at the bulk expansion if I look at the bulk expansion bulk look at the bulk may be here. Then from this point it starts expanding actually why? If it is not air entrain it starts expanding because the hydraulic pressure causes the whole thing to hydraulic pressure of the freezing because of the ice being formed inside it causes it to sort of excess internal pressure and that causes a kind of expansion till it fails till the surface concrete goes out. While if I have air entrain concrete if I have air entrain concrete the pressure is relieved pressure is relieved and as the pressure is relieved contract skeleton is you know it gets contracted because of the thermal contraction effect thermal contraction effect and this all together you know there is actually a reduction in the volume even more than thermal contraction more than thermal contraction. So, it is not only a frost resistant air entrain concrete not only exhibit a kind of reduction in reduction in the you know thermal contraction effect but it also shows further reduction in the volume of the whole system because the pressure that was that would have been created hydraulically would have been released somewhere else and the contraction is even more in this particular case. So, additional contraction this is because of the relief of the hydraulic pressure this is because of the relief of the hydraulic pressure. So, this hydraulic pressure that is that gets released anyway there is no pressure some force will be filled with ice and the contraction of ice will also you know it will also take place this all results in volume contraction instead of volume expansion of air entrain concrete. So, that is that is actually protection from frost attack essentially the effect is loss of surface concrete effective thickness then can be reduced when frost attack occurring and some sort of empirical formulations are there. So, one can conceive actually with time this is my section thickness this is my section thickness with time the strength will reduce from the surface to inside. So, this is my design strength at this point F C K but the strength will be lower with time. So, if it is at very large time or infinite time H is the let us say H is the at infinite time H is the you know H is the depth up to which the strength reduction occurs because there is a freezing cycle and thawing cycle. So, moisture will get in during thawing frozen and then once cooled again fine or the it will you know some of it will come out. So, finally, the water will again get in. So, there is a wetting drying scenario and normally there is a depth of influence beyond which no freezing action will be freezing action of frost action will not be seen. So, effective in this one therefore, since F C K is only available up to this in fact, one can conceive that effective thickness is reduced and some empirical formula is available there are number of them in fact this is one of them F C K at a distance D is given by F C K multiplied by 1 minus 1 minus D by H into N. Now, what is D D is the depth and N is F N depends upon number of cycles N depends upon number of cycle H is the depth of influence maximum depth. So, when you know when t is equals to 0 everywhere it will be F C K is equal to 0 everywhere it will be F C K. So, this value should turn out to be 0 this value should turn out to be 0 this value should turn out to be 0. So, this value you know it will be H by D is the depth and this to the power very large value makes this value altogether small because this value will be a fraction D by H is a fraction 1 minus D by H is also a fraction and fraction to the power large value tend to make it very very small. So, when t is equals to 0 this value will be F C K everywhere now when t is equals to infinity after very very long time this is equals to 0. So, this 0 means this is 0 means this is equals to 1. So, F C K at D and this is valid up to the depth of H beyond H is this is not valid. So, any depth up to D you know this value at t is equals to infinity this value will tend to be n will tend to be 0. So, this anything to the power 0 is equals to 1. So, 1 minus 1 is equals to 0. So, F you know this value would tend to be at a depth this will be this will tend to be this will tend to be F 0 only small you know at over a very long period of time all you know F C K value will tend to be 0 that is what this equation says all right. But then this is t is infinity. So, this is 1 empirical equation through which one can actually get some idea one can get some idea that this is the how the strength changes. So, this is F C. So, F C would change q strength will change like this parabolic in this manner and one can fit an equation of this kind to this particular one right. So, that is what it is. So, this is you know since it is empirical I have just taken part of it and to explain the scenario. There are similar other other empirical model for example, if you consider rate of this R as the rate of disintegration one can assume step variation like this step variation like this. So, first cycle you know this is the depth of disintegration this x is the depth of disintegration this is time. Second cycle there is more and so on so forth and you can actually approximate. So, these are its cycle every cycle there is some depth of penetration increases and you can actually linearly fit this. So, depth of penetration can be linearly related to time. In other words the rate can be one can find out the rate which will be slope of this line slope of this line would be the rate. So, rate is given by another formula empirical formula F coefficient called C environmental C and B securing C C age a constant to the power 0.7 and F C k plus 8 to the power minus 1.4. Now, S is the S is the you know loss of structurally effective concrete is a function of rate into time. So, rate of structurally effective concrete loss of structural effective concrete is given by this which is the slope of this line and you know a structurally effective. So, this depth represents the depth of disintegration. So, S equals to R into t now how is C environmental C curing and C age and C environment is related to the environment of exposure C curing is related to the curing condition and at age after you know and these are constants. So, now these are given in the next slide C curing is given as 0.85 plus 0.17 log D where D is the curing days. So, you have higher curing days C curing will be less in fact rate will be less. So, you see you can see the factors which affects the frost attack C age. So, if the age is more obviously, this value should be less, but this will also depend upon the supplementary cementitious material or pozzolaneic material that you are using. For example, P S F stands for the proportion of you know percentage of silica fume percentage of slag percentage of flyers P there is a proportion of silica fume plus furnace slag and flyers respectively expressed as percentage of mass of total binder content. So, if you use slag flyers and silica fume this effect of age will be less because this value will be so large values of this one this tends to be smaller value this you know 1 minus this this higher value this smaller value. So, this will become this will become 1 minus this. So, this will become larger you know. So, this this is something to do with the effect of age. See environment is given as 80 to 164 very severe condition latitude 60 plus minus 5 that is you know subtropical climate 40 to 84 severe latitude 60 plus minus 10 and 20 to 44 moderate and for favorable no phase. So, depending upon the situation one can choose this environmental condition I think this is this is there something wrong this is not correct this would be 20 possibly. So, whatever it is so environmental condition depending upon environmental condition moderate condition or severe exposure condition or very severe exposure condition this value of sea would depend and therefore, you can obtain the rate you can obtain the rate from this expression F C K stands for the characteristic strength 80 is taken as 1.65 sigma in other words this represents a kind of mean strength. So, larger the strength R will be smaller larger the strength more the better the grade of concrete R will be smaller and A is a factor A is a factor you know is a constant depending upon S into T is a total time actually S is that S into T is the time. So, what we have seen is A is a constant depending upon air content. So, you have high air content there will be reduction. So, A is a factor or constant depending upon air content higher air content less will be the rate and therefore, S will be you know S is since S is R into T right. So, R less that means, for you know loss of structure concrete would be slower process. So, it can last for longer period of time. So, that is related to frost attack and surface deterioration by leaching that occurs in some of those you know many many places exposed to water. So, rate of disintegration for salt weathering situation is given by again a formula of the similar kind C this is an empirical formula, but although the values may not be applicable universally, but it tells us what are the factors which governs this. In other words in case of frost action it is governed by the air content A to the power minus 7 the strength of the concrete or grade of the concrete and it also depends upon environmental curing and age which again in turn depends upon flyers lag and you know silica fuel content all right. Similarly, leaching would depend upon C environmental and C curing. The C curing is same as before curing it will depend upon curing H F C you know the formula was if you can see that if you can remember the formulas 0.85 plus 0.17 log of D. So, D is the curing H. So, larger the curing H C cur is less right larger the curing H less C cur is less and so on so forth. So, C environment is given for the gulf condition for marine condition and for normal condition this for favorable condition F C K to the power 3.3. So, that means, it is a curing condition is important same more the curing condition C cur will be less environment depends upon marine environment gulf condition does leaching because as you remember we talked of C water attack we said that the ithrinjite and you know the calcium sulfate which are formed are leached out. So, this leaching rate is given by this formula and S gives you the structurally disintegrated concrete R into T. So, this gives us third one is related to abrasion of ice and the similar sort of situation when there is marine environment or environment where there is water and your ice body. So, abrasion depth A B R can be found out now the phenomena is like this you have a ice comes and hits it and you have a two ways action you know there is a tau acting there there is a tau acting there there is a tau acting there tau shear stress and also a sigma normal stress. So, both sigma shear stress because it will heat at an angle and you will have both you know shear stress and sigma the normal stress acting on to it and this causes abrasion of the paste. So, the paste goes out first and then exposes the aggregate exposes the aggregate and when we have further shear stress coming and heating the aggregate and the normal stresses coming and heating the paste if the aggregates gets loose and so, loosening of the aggregate to docker and finally, the aggregate will go out and then further shear stress and the normal stress will be acting and this phenomena may continue depending upon how the ice hits and this scenario you know this causes aggregate loss and structural disintegrated concrete. So, S is the movement of ice sheet in kilometer the formula given is something like this the depth of abrasion due to ice is given by AI log N I N N N N 2 by N S by N 1 R I and 1 minus AI into B. So, B is given by this B is related to strength S is the movement of ice sheet in kilometer and N etcetera will just define. So, when ice comes and heats the behavior is something like this. So, A is the volume of aggregate proportion of radius R now you see this is in this one R I there is a some I going from 1 to N. So, S is the you know volume proportion of aggregate of size R larger the size it would depend upon the size larger size larger the size and some total for all sizes should be taken into account B is related to strength N is the number of ice impacts subscript S and L I D nodes impact during sheet movement and during loosening of N 8. So, first is the sheet movement is this first one you know S and you know S in movement in kilometer N S and N L N S stands for number of heat during the initial phase and S stands for later on for loosening after loosening of the aggregate S is the kilometer movement of the ice B is an abrasion rate of aggregate and ABR is given by this formula when bond between aggregate and cement has disintegrated under freestive action ABR could be one, but this was the earlier formula and this is the case when bond has cement and aggregate has deteriorated under freestive action already. So, that means previous one was before there is no freestive action, but once the freestive action has occurred this depth of abrasion is given by this you know this equation which is more simple A stands for the aggregate of size volume proportion of aggregate of size I th size and B is of course, strength 1 over strength you know 3 divided by 3.3 divided by strength. So, as an empirical formula into S stands for movement of the ice sheet. So, 3 by F C into S millimeter per kilometer. So, movement of ice in kilometer so that is what it is. So, there is an empirical formula again gives you abrasion by ice. Now, what is the what are the ways? What are the ways actually we you know what are the ways actually we protect against this kind of scenario? We have seen one is the low water cement ratio that is strength should be good higher the strength all these cases of frost action abrasion by ice etc or any leaching even in marine environment this would be less. So, one is the strength in case of frost action it is air entrainment. If you have air entrainment this will perform better and curing condition age etc. So, the factors you have seen. So, protection should be low water cement ratio air entrainment. Now, air entrainment reduces the strength a little bit because you are introducing new pores that will reduce the strength somewhat. Essentially air entrainment air entraining admixtures we defined when you talked of you know admixtures. So, air entraining admixtures can be added but they have small action you know slight reduction in the strength as well. So, that is the protection against frost action high water cement ratio good curing as well as air entraining air entrained concrete. Now, let us look into the introduce corrosion. One of the major problem or most common problem is the corrosion of rebar. Rebar corrosion is one of the major problem in RCC and even in PSTC precinct concrete corrosion major problem. And worldwide corrosion is a big problem for metals lot of loss or money goes in repair due to corrosion. So, let us define corrosion first of all we must understand iron like we talked of concrete other day we said that you know a fee does not exist in nature in isolated form rather it exists as oxides sulphide etcetera and in ores. So, in ores minerals we mine it and extract it. So, the minerals in which iron is contained it exist in oxides sulphide etcetera etcetera. Therefore, iron is not a natural material. Now, how do I get iron out of it? I expand a considerable energy in extracting F e from all thus mu chemical potential that the other day we talked about mu you know the chemical potential we talked about mu of F e will be higher than F e s because you have given a lot of energy. So, mu of F e will be definitely greater than mu of you know F e s or F e o F e 3 O 4 etcetera magnetite, hematite whatever you call it. So, you have actually given energy. So, therefore, it will have a tendency to come to a natural state. Hence, F e has a tendency to react and attain a stable state. Therefore, it has a tendency thermodynamic tendency because you have its potential chemical potential is higher. Reaction of F e with this environment causes loss of material from structural form where F e exists. For example, you have a structural steel corrosion would cause reduction from the steel member or in case of reinforcement that could loss of material, but then loss of material might manifest itself in different manner in case of reinforced concrete and in structural system. So, reinforced concrete it might manifest itself by kind of expansion will come to that later on. So, but loss of F e with this environment causes loss of the material you know it causes loss of the material from the structural form. For example, reinforcement might lose this material and if this loss of material metal which we are calling as deterioration of the metal if it leads to impediment of functional performance that is not able to do the functional performance anymore that is corrosion. So, therefore, functional performance is important a little bit of loss of metal if it does not create any problem as far as my functional performance is concerned I would not call it corrosion in engineering terms. So, when functional performance remains unaffected by reaction it may not be corrosion in engineering sense. Some loss very loss little loss rate of loss very small, slow loss if that is occurring I may not call it really a corrosion process. Corrosion process is important when there is a loss of there is a loss in the you know loss in the functional properties. So, that is how we define corrosion process that is how we define corrosion process and if we classify the corrosion classification can be low temperature or high temperature you know corrosion is generally referred to metal but then corrosion also exists for many other items even you might find some book of corrosion of concrete. So, although this is basically deterioration we are talking about but here we are specifically mentioning about metal or rather reinforcement or rebar we are looking at rebar corrosion. So, classification of corrosion in metal can be low temperature corrosion or high temperature corrosion or you can classify in terms of direct or electrochemical corrosion some may be simply oxidized. For example, there is a hot iron high temperature corrosion you put in oxygen you just you know blow oxygen over high temperature and high temperature it might get oxidized. So, so high temperature corrosion and it is a direct corrosion but otherwise there can be corrosion which is electrochemical corrosion but a better way to classify corrosion will be weight weight corrosion and dry corrosion. So, direct corrosion weight dry corrosion is usually maybe direct corrosion but wet corrosion is largely electrochemical in nature it is largely electrochemical in nature it is electrochemical in nature and occurs in presence of liquid quite often it is water in aqueous solution or electrolytes in presence of electrolytes and this is the most common. So, wet corrosion occurs in presence of liquid in aqueous solution or electrolytes and it is the most common and rebar corrosion is wet corrosion in presence of water rebar corrosion is wet corrosion in presence of water because reinforcement is not subjected to high temperature most of them because cover concrete even in case of fire it takes time for heat to reach there an oxidation is a secondary aspects that is not but but within reinforcement when water penetrates electrochemical corrosion can occur. So, therefore, rebar corrosion is largely wet corrosion and electrochemical corrosion. So, it is largely wet and electrochemical corrosion right largely wet and electrochemical corrosion. Now, to understand corrosion we might understand what is galvanic cell you know we are familiar with battery we are familiar with battery. So, this is my zinc shell dry cell and this is my graphite or carbon another electrode. So, there are two electrodes carbon and this is zinc. Now, if I connect a battery this is positive terminal this is negative terminal. So, if I connect a battery through this what happens is light glows and we know this phenomena is electrolysis essentially ammonium chloride solution is here could be if it is ammonium chloride molten fuse form or whatever it could be there. What happens is zinc ion actually moves out of it zinc ion moves out of it right and basically electron moves in this direction electron moves along this direction. So, my positive current movement is along this direction positive current movement is along this direction. So, zinc ion moves along this direction zinc ion move along this direction and electron moves along this direction. So, my positive ion co-current movement is along this direction. So, this is my positive electrode. So, this is my cathode this is my anode that is a galvanic cell we know that you know battery we use all of them. So, whenever we connect a kind of load to a battery and this is governed by the you know the zinc that will get dissolved amount of zinc would get dissolved is governed by ferrida slaw which says that mass of the metal dissolved mass of the metal dissolved is proportional to current into time or the charge i into t thus column you know. So, that much charge it will proportional to charge. Now this constant it can be written as you know it is in fact it can be stated in another manner you need 9 6 5 0 0 column right or ferrida is constant. So, 9 9 6 5 0 0 column is required to deposit one gram equivalent of electrolyte. So, if the metal atom equate is MA it is balance or electron that it can lose is z 2 electrons it can lose. So, therefore, its equivalent gram equivalent will be molecular weight express in gram divided by z. So, 9 6 5 0 0 column 9 6 5 0 0 column will actually deposit you know this much column will deposit MA by z. So, one column will deposit MA by z into 9 6 5 0 0 which is you know grams that is ferrida s constant and it column will deposit that many grams. So, this is F ferrida s constant. So, MA by you know this is given by this is a ferrida slaw. The mass of metal deposited or metal dissolved zinc would or whatever metal is proportional to the charge you are passing through or i into t and it is given by MA divided by z f into i t. So, that is a galvanic cell when you have two separate electrodes here. So, that is called a galvanic cell right from where you can derive current. A corrosion cell is formed in the same metal anode and cathode are formed you know if you see this if you see this you have anode and you have cathode. From anode metal moves along this direction zinc ion was moving along this direction and electron was moving along this direction and at the cathode you know zinc ion was reaching there and electron was you know was passing in this manner. So, at anode actually metal dissolution occurs and at cathode of course other cathode reaction in the rocker. So, you can have some negative anode and cathode formation in the metal itself for example, this is positive this is positive this is positive. So, two electrodes itself might form in the metal itself depending upon of course, its composition because there will be variation in composition and all metal for example, if I connect zinc with platinum zinc and platinum obviously, this will always be cathode. Aluminium with iron this will be anode whereas, iron with platinum this will be anode. So, it depends upon the tendency of the metal to lose electron and this also depends upon its composition metal or alloy it could be right how easily it can lose electron. So, this this we will discuss sometime later on. So, ions you know positive positive cathodes cathodes and anodes can form in the same metal itself. So, when you are looking at wet corrosion or request corrosion positive it is electrochemical and anode and cathode can form in the same metal itself because its composition will differ from point to point and also the concentration of electrolyte outside may differ. So, all these factors put together you cannot have identical kind of a metal or alloy supposing consider a rebar it will not be exactly same throw. So, some portion will be higher tendency to lose electron some portion will not be where it will have tendency to lose electron that will act like an anode other places it may look it may you know. So, at anode actually oxidation occurs and current enter into electrolyte like I said zinc at cathode reduction occurs current enter into the metal right current into the enter into the metal. So, positive ion will enter into the electrolyte it at cathode positive ion will enter into the metal itself. So, here the difference is corrosion cell you have both anode and cathode in the same metal even in same FE if you see the outside concentration effect as I am saying the metal you know composition may not be exactly same in this negative zone and positive zone. But supposing I pass nitrogen in the same dilute sodium chloride ion to ion electrodes are there. I pass air here and I pass nitrogen here is inert here oxygen. So, you will find that actually this will act like a you know like here it will act like an anode where you know and then this other place it will act like a. So, positive ion moves out of this one positive ion moves out of this one right in other words electron moves in this direction. So, this is acting as anode and this is acting as cathode. So, this is acting as anode where this nitrogen I have passed as anode compared to this one. So, it also depends upon concentration of the you know concentration of the material in the solution. So, this is nitrogenated I have passed nitrogen from outside. So, that oxygen is driven out here I pass oxygen and one of them will act same material will act like anode and cathode. So, two issues one composition of the metals are not same even concentration of the electrolyte may not be same. And therefore, anode and cathode formation can take place within the metal itself and that forms a corrosion cell that forms a corrosion cell. So, differentials aeration cell as we call it it forms a corrosion cell. And at the anode or cathode at the you know this there is a metal there is an electrical double layer. So, this Helmholtz model which has been later on. So, the charge you know if you see the potential potential there is a double layer exist and potential here and in the bulk electrolyte there is a difference. Initially it was conceived as a linearly varying and the point where it becomes potential does not change anymore that is called outer Helmholtz plane. But then there is a diffused layer then consumed called go Chapman model and then you have got Starns model there is a diffused layer which is extending and then there is a constant. So, basically electrical double layer formation that occurs at the metal well I think we will not go into details of this at the moment we might come back or discuss this sometime later. So, basically at the anode metal will come out of this and metal will come out and at the cathode actually hydrogen reaction can occur it is an example not necessary always hydrogen reaction will occur it will depend upon the composition of the electrolyte itself. So, for example, here water is there and reaction of water with oxygen etcetera if it liberates out hydrogen at the cathode then two hydrogen can form hydrogen molecule in let us say metal in a HCl solution. So, this could be one of the cases where hydrogen evolution is actually occurring right. So, but metal comes out metal comes out. So, here the other reaction so, at the cathode actually H2 will generate and at the anode metal will dentism. So, that shows and the electron will move like this that again shows corrosion cell aqueous corrosion cell. So, electric chemical metal dissolution that is what it shows. So, at anode metal gets dissolved and it loses it becomes ion loses to electron who moves along this direction at cathode to hydrogen accept electron and but this is not the all the common reaction in some cases this occurs in reinforcement this is not very common but except in certain cases we shall see that later on. So, in rebar corrosion if this is your reinforcement bar there will be anode somewhere there will be cathode somewhere and at anode ion will dissolve I mean go into the solution Fe2 plus plus electron will move along this direction and the current flow rate if I call it density as I core and at cathode actually this electron will come out react with water and oxygen to form hydroxyl ion. This hydroxyl ion can further react with this Fe to form FeOH2 which may not be which is usually not stable and can lead to rust formation depending upon the situation or you know environmental ex a condition of the electrolyte itself. So, what forms what kind of rust forms will depend upon the environmental you know electrolyte condition. presence of oxygen and moisture therefore, is necessary for corrosion reaction to progress in rebar completely dry your fully saturated concrete do not exhibit significant rebar corrosion being an electrochemical process concrete resistivity will also play an important problem and we will see this later on we will come back to corrosion again. So, this is again shows the corrosion process in concrete but the reaction shown are different reaction actually hydroxyl ion then iron and they together might form Fe2 or 3 but may form something else also let us see the next reaction. Enodic reaction is common cathodic reaction either could be this is there and this may react with you know the Fe may itself may react with water forming to hydrogen and this to hydrogen can receive electron and form H2 or Fe can react with FeOH2 or FeOH2 can react with oxygen and water forming FeOH3. So, what we see is there can be different reaction possible once there are different reaction possible FeOH3 can break down into Fe2 or 3 ferric oxide and water rust. So, there are different kind of reaction and different kind of products are possible. So, different form products form or remains stable depending upon electrolytic condition namely pH or chloride ion concentration chloride ion concentration pH or chloride ion concentration when we are saying depending upon electrolytic condition the environment electrolytic environment mainly it is a pH and chloride ion concentration go on this electrolytic condition. So, different product can form different product can form now some product are not so dangerous you know for example, in case of chloride there could be some sort of loss in the metal this reaction can take place cathodic reaction could be this and then finally, Fe plus plus can react with this. So, if it is chloride is there without chloride you have seen the reaction and this may form even a kind of pit FeCl2 creates some kind of rust and finally, some sort of product like this is formed there are various kind of products form. So, we will come back to this sometime later on but what we are trying to say is depending upon the environment different types of product formation can take place. We refer some condition called passive condition where it is near to inert condition when corrosion reaction is slow or negligible. At high pH oxides form Fe 2 O 3 or Fe 3 O 4 tends to form a passive layer and protects the river that is why I saying at high pH Fe 3 O 4 or some black rust as we call it some products are stable while at low pH Fe Fe O 3 of some form we will come to that sometime later on that is stable which we call as red rust. So, at lower pH high concentration of chloride passive layer get destroyed and the stable material is stable material is stable material is and the stable material is just let me put it stable material is red rust red rust can form. So, you see under different condition different product can form red rust can form or black rust can form. Now, an analogy is actually the steel if you look at it when I produce steel I have created an delta G is the potential difference free energy I have changed. Now, if black rust is forming it may be very slow rate if red rusting forming it may be faster rate and if I have provided a full protection coated it it may not you know the rate would be very very small. So, there are all cases there is a tendency of this to come out log T, but the tendency is what we call potential thermodynamic tendency, but the kinetics which governs the rate log T versus you know the falling rate with log T rate at which it come back to this stable state they might differ. So, in a passive state depending upon passive state it might be somewhere there and with a coating complete coating protection 100 percent know what a almost 0 water it might be something like this, but in a conducive condition the rate could be higher. So, rate is a function of all this and therefore, tendency cannot be controlled, but kinetics can be controlled. So, service life with respect to corrosion we define you see concrete initially is passive, but it can lose its passivity it can lose its passivity due to pH reduction or chloride coming in from outside. So, therefore, this we call as depassivation time and this is the corrosion time. So, there are two things which causes this are carbonation and chloride. So, therefore, first we will look into carbonation and chloride and then they are ingress or they are effect and then we will look into corrosion. So, this is summarized our discussion today we looked into frost attack and the relative models. Then we introduced river corrosion and we said that normally it can be passive, but carbonation and chloride can actually depassivate it. So, we will start from this slide last slide that we have just finished in the next class that is next lecture module 8. Thank you very much for hearing. === Lecture 31 Transcript === Welcome to module 8 lecture 3. In the last lecture, we just started, I mean we just concluded when we were concluding, we talked about the depressive version of rebar and we just mentioned about the service life of simplest model for service life of concrete, you know reinforced concrete in the context of rebar corrosion and we said that two phenomena which causes depressive version, one of them is carbonation, the other is chloride. So, we look into carbonation process models protection, chloride ingress process models and protection, right. So, just to recollect the service life with respect to corrosion, we defined like this in the last class, we just mentioned this diagram, same diagram, we have looked into in the last class, where we said that initially concrete is, you know reinforced in reinforced concrete, concrete this provides protection to the rebar and with time, this may get affected if it is exposed to a chloride environment or if it is exposed to atmosphere, where carbon dioxide from the atmosphere can come and reduce it pH. So, we also mentioned last class that pH of concrete at certain pH values, at high pH values, actually the oxide forms, passivates the steel in other words forms a layer over the steel bar, which essentially do not impair with the performance of the reinforcement bar and in fact, it protects it and that is a passivation layer. So, it is essentially oxide coating thin thick dense, thin but dense, thin but dense through which if we cannot go into the solution and rate of formation of such oxide is very slow and therefore, we do not may not term this as active corrosion. So, this is passive condition. Now, this passive condition is broken down during this period of time and that is what we call as deep asivation time and this can occur either because of carbonation or because of free chloride, we will define free chloride later on, what is free chloride because there must be then if it is not free chloride, there must be something else bound chloride, total chloride will come to that later on. So, once the deep asivation has occurred that is the layer of oxide, which is formed on top of the rebar at high pH level is destroyed at a pH value which is low, you know when pH turns out to be low or sufficient chloride has come then corrosion process might start and the time after which you have a service ability limit is reach which is actually time of appearance of first visible crack, you know. So, the time at which first visible crack is observed because corrosion process results in cracking which we will see later on how it does. So, when first visible crack has appeared that time we call a service life that is you know there is a limit of service ability limit when a first visible crack has appeared this time we call as corrosion time and total service life is of the element is T P plus T C. So, service life of the element is T P plus T C. So, today we will look largely into this phenomena how it get dissipated, first we will look at carbonation and then we will look at chloride. Carbonation process if I look at it you see carbon dioxide from the atmosphere carbon dioxide from the atmosphere penetrates into concrete from the surface as shown here and it can in presence of moisture it can form you know carbon dioxide plus water can form carbonic acid and this carbonic acid actually can react with let us say sodium hydroxide to form sodium carbonate plus water. So, sodium hydroxide that is alkali is present or potassium hydroxide they are present in the cement material cementitious material concrete system and it can react forming sodium carbonate and water. Now, this sodium carbonate or potassium carbonate can react with calcium hydroxide in the cement forming calcium carbonate and again water and this also can form in this manner you know it can form calcium carbonate and sorry sodium hydroxide calcium carbonate and sodium hydroxide sodium hydroxide this should be sodium hydroxide and this should be potassium hydroxide plus potassium hydroxide. In other words calcium carbonate is formed and if we write it straight away simple reaction calcium hydroxide plus carbon dioxide in presence of water actually would form calcium carbonate and water. Now, since calcium you know the calcium hydroxide or sodium hydroxide material is getting consumed in the process therefore, the pH of the concrete will reduce down to start with pH of the concrete is around 12 to 13. So, pH of concrete to start with is around 12 to 13 which can get reduced down to even lower value than 9. What we understand is the intermediate step is sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide. So, calcium hydroxide provides a kind of reserve alkalinity. One sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide you know they do not get consumed initially they are just the in between steps. So, sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide they react with carbonic acid which is formed because of the carbon dioxide coming from the atmosphere in presence of moisture this reaction can proceed and sodium carbonate can react with calcium hydroxide forming calcium carbonate. In this process calcium hydroxide which is a sparingly soluble salt will get dissolved more into the pore solution you know part of it was soluble got dissolved and part is still as precipitate. So, this precipitate will dissolve more and more as it is consumed from the system to form calcium carbonate. At time will come when even the sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide will all get consumed because all alkaline material will get consumed by carbon dioxide. At some under such situations when all alkaline materials including sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide has been consumed by carbon dioxide from the atmosphere in presence of moisture forming carbonates pH will reduce down significantly and pH will be less than 9 now and when it is less than 9 deep acidation can occur. Deep acidation can occur at certain lower pHs F e 3 O 4 you know the oxides may not be oxides may not be stable under such situation at low pH and actually the black crust which I talked about in the last class may not be stable and now red rust formation may occur which occupies a lot more volume then the volume that is occupied by black crust or the steel and thereby can cause expensive pressure will come to that sometime later on. Now, therefore you know what we see is therefore what we see is pH can get reduced down by consumption of alkaline material. Intermediate steps are not given here but I just discussed them but how do they how do the carbon dioxide penetrate it penetrates through the pore in the system penetrates through the pore in the system and as it penetrates and it must be moist pore you know the pore must be also moist there must be moisture here if there is no in case in absence of moisture reaction will not proceed because it is occurs in solution phase carbonic acid will not form. So, carbon dioxide plus water is necessary and therefore, water has to be there. So, it comes through the pores water has to be there and as all alkaline material up to this zone is finished we call it the carbonation you know carbonation reaction has occurred and it has carbonation you know carbonation neutralization so this is the neutralization depth and that is the carbonation depth. So, we call it carbonation depth we call it carbonation depth. So, up to which carbonation depth up to which all the alkaline material has got neutralized by carbon dioxide carbon dioxide. So, again the pores are important moisture situation is important. Now, if it is a fully submerged concrete moisture will be available, but carbon dioxide concentration will be very low in dissolved water and if it is a fully dry concrete reaction will not proceed all the carbon dioxide is there. So, this occurs only attend certain relative humidity. Now, if you remember when you talked of carbonation shrinkage around 55 percent relative humidity carbonation was carbonation shrinkage was maximum. In other words carbonation proceeds maximum at carbonation is maximum at 50 let us say 50 to 60 percent RH. So, 50 to 60 percent RH carbonation is maximum 100 percent RH it reduces down and if it is fully moist actually no carbonation will occur. To have carbonation or to poor carbonation to proceed I need both oxygen or both carbon dioxide that is air is present in air you know about 3 percent or so depending upon the situation and of course, the moisture. So, that is the carbonation process that is actually the carbonation process that is the carbonation process. Now, we can you know what is your our interest is a carbonation depth if I call x as the carbonation depth carbonation depth this is important for us carbonation depth is important for us. And we do model this carbonation depth because when the carbonation depth reaches their reinforcement level that is the time deposition can occur. So, therefore, service life with respect to carbonation will be defined when carbonation depth has reached the reval level or more. Now, how does carbon dioxide comes see there is a concentration of the carbon dioxide concentration of the carbon dioxide is low in the concrete outside it is more to start with to start with concentration. So, it is basically molecular diffusion molecules are in molecules are molecules molecules are in molecules are in brownian movement movement. So, outside carbon dioxide molecules there will be in brownian movement and they collide with each other as long as concentrations are same. But, where concentration are less carbon dioxide molecule will not be able to interact with the same molecule. So, what will happen they will penetrate inside the jump you know. So, you have if you have high carbon dioxide concentration here let us say high carbon dioxide concentration and less carbon dioxide concentration here low carbon dioxide low CO 2 high CO 2 CO 2 high the molecule will move along this direction and since they will not be able to interact less molecule will be available for interaction here of collision more molecule will tend to move. So, they will try to diffuse. So, this is molecular diffusion right. So, basically in liquid situation of course, it is a concentration difference. So, concentration difference is the driving force and we said in case of liquid last class we mentioned that there could be osmotic pressure difference and that could be the driving force behind such diffusion for diffusion. So, carbon dioxide from outside tend to diffuse inside and this diffusion process is governed by fixed diffusion law. So, fixed diffusion law says the flux diffusion flux you know could be in some unit kg per meter square per unit time diffusion flux is proportional to DC dx where C is the rate of you know C is the concentration gradient C is DC dx is the concentration gradient C is the concentration. So, in our case C CO 2 by dx and the constant of proportionality I will call it carbon dioxide diffusion coefficient. So, flux Q is proportional to DC concentration gradient of the carbon dioxide. So, carbon dioxide concentration here would be 0 here would be much higher let us atmospheric carbon dioxide and therefore, it will this is the x DC dx you know if I am considering a small n DC dx let us say carbon dioxide concentration is higher low there. So, one can think in terms of you know it is proportional to concentration gradient concentration gradient gradient. Now, this is what is fixed diffusion law and if you are looking at the mass balance then you will get actually rate of change of concentration with time rate of change of concentration with time will be given as DC x square the diffusion equation heat diffusion equation you know quite a number of diffusion equation follows this. So, this is the second equation but in we are not interested in this manner right now we are not interested in this one right now we are not interested in this one we are not we are only interested in this. So, the flux is proportional to concentration gradient flux is proportional to concentration gradient right flux is proportional to concentration gradient. So, d q if I consider the flux at you know the this has already got up to x it has got already carbonated it has got the concrete has got carbonated up to x. So, concentration between C 0 outside C 0 here and C in the concrete is here. So, concentration gradient will be given as C 0 minus C divided by x that is you know concentration gradient d is the d is the diffusion coefficient d is the diffusion coefficient and if a is the area flux is per unit area. So, quantity the d q is the quantity of carbon dioxide coming to this d x element coming to this d x element right. So, it there is no this is already carbonated this carbonated already carbonated like we shown in the last diagram already carbonated up to x depth x and now the carbonation is occurring at d x element carbonation is occurring over this d x element. So, as it comes in as it comes in the gradient will be C 0 minus C where C 0 is outside C C is the inside divided by x that is the gradient and we assume that gradient is constant there multiplied by the area A and this is the amount of carbon dioxide that would be coming in you know the flux that would coming into d x multiplied by d t that was the rate. So, quantity of carbon dioxide coming in. So, d q stand for quantity of carbon dioxide carbon dioxide in is d C 0 C C divided by so d A C 0 minus multiplied by d t. So, that is the quantity I should have used j for flux j is equals to d del c del x you know somebody could have written it like this j is the flux this is the quantity this I am talking of quantity. Now, this if it is getting all neutralized at this moment it is getting all neutralized at this moment let us say A is the alkaline material present small A is the alkaline material present alkaline material that is being neutralized let us say it is all. So, the total volume of carbon dioxide coming total volume of total mass of carbon dioxide coming that will dissolve you know that will actually react with the alkaline material present in the d x. So, d x into A is the volume d x into d x into d x into d x into A is the volume d B volume and total carbon dioxide consumed let us say A is the alkaline you know carbon dioxide consumed by consumed by by alkaline material A is the carbon dioxide consumed by alkaline material which I can find out from stoichiometry if I know the total alkaline material present per unit volume right and multiplied by the stoichiometric factor. So, A is the carbon dioxide consumed by the alkaline material present in material present in d x present in d x. So, A d B you know A is the carbon dioxide consumed per unit volume in the d x element. So, A into d B that is A into A d x that is the this must be equals to d q. So, d q is the quantity that comes in in d t time and it is all consumed right you know. So, for the alkaline material present multiplied by the stoichiometric factor that will give you the carbon dioxide that can be consumed. So, A is the carbon dioxide that can be consumed by the alkaline material present small A is the work as A is the amount of carbon dioxide that can be consumed by the alkaline material present in unit volume of the concrete. So, A is the carbon dioxide consumed by alkaline material present in concrete per unit volume unit volume of concrete. So, then A d B or A A small A d x must be the must be the equal to d q. So, that is that is the idea. So, it must be equals to d q. So, if it is equals to d q then I simply integrate this some constant that is 1 by x into some constant let me call it k dash d t is equals to you know some other constant that is a k double dash d x. So, what I will get if I I will get k you know if I integrate d t integrate d t and this side it will be some constant let us say k 3 prime x d x integrated. So, I will get it x square by 2. So, in other words k all this can be you know k all this can be put I can write that t is equals to some constant t is equals to some constant let me call it at k 4 prime into into x square. So, in other words I write x equals to k under root t that is what I have done. So, by simple integration I can find out x equals to k under root t now this model is very very simple model absolutely simple stick assuming the properties of this is all uniform after even carbonation and it is not considering many factors actually does not consider many factors. But one thing comes out from this expression is that x is proportional to root t x is proportional to root t. So, this is very simple model and actually x equals is proportional to root t is what is come out what comes out from this kind of a model right. But there are complex models but there you know finally, many most of the model makes it some form of t to the power half relationship because experiment will be also this is largely found to be valid. So, k is the question now k depends upon many factors this is for our qualitative understanding. One thing the depth of carbonation at any time is proportional to root t root over t the time from the starting of carbonation that more or less you know fits in well with the experimental data. But constant of proportionality empirically people have seen that it is a function of c environment c air a and b are to constant and strength of the concrete. So, c environment and c air we have talked about now f m is equals to f c k power plus 8. So, it is mean strength actually one can take it that way and a and b a and b for different combinations of blended cement blended you know cementitious material and OPC are given. For example, for you know f m to the power b it is for for OPC a is 1800. So, that means k will be higher but it is also b is minus 1.7. So, this is higher but this minus 1.7 means the higher the strength actually k would be you know lower higher the strength k will be lower compared to let us say flyers silica fume or blast furnace slag blends normally blast furnace you can go up to 70 percent silica fume people use about 9 10 percent and flyers use 20 percent. So, this is a kind of practical blends which one would use and these values are about empirical is suggested values are 1.2 minus 1.2 etcetera. And if you calculate out this let us say 1800 into some strength f m to the power 1.7 minus right or in other words 1800 divided by f m to the power 1.7 you will find this k value comes out to be low compared to you know 300 into into divided by f m to the power minus 1.2 I mean 1.2 see 1 this is nearly squaring up and this is say it is 50 mp this will be somewhere around 2000 or so while if it is in this case 15 to 1 to the power 1.2 would make it 100 or so you know let us say even I mean it is not even it is just slightly more than 1. So, one can find out one can find out what is this value but 300 divided by it will be 3 this will be much less this much will be much less. So, blending blended you know curve this once actually increases flyers silica fume and this actually increases this increases the k value somewhat. So, that means carbonation is likely to be faster for identical conditions of environment and air with blended system with you know flyers blending well it is understood because we know that the alkaline materials are consumed by this alkaline materials are consumed by blasphonics like silica fume. So, less alkaline A will be now smaller a smaller a in the previous equation A stands for I mean A is the alkaline material or carbon dioxide required to consume carbon dioxide required to consume alkaline material will be less. So, therefore, this is you know this values you come like you know it comes appears like this this values are but that is nothing to worry much actually because although the carbonation process much be faster moisture increase may be slower in this material and also you know there is there there are microstructure is improved then their resistivity is resistivity is high for this kind of material whenever you add post-alonic material resistivity increases significantly as we shall see later on and therefore, actually they do not create much of a problem when it comes to kinetics of corrosion. So, they have a tendency to depassivate but when it comes to kinetics they might even prove better. C environment is 1 or 0.5 and for air entrained concrete you know C-E-R is 0.7 otherwise 1 air entrained concrete is more for us environmental depend upon whether it is exposed because this empirical formula has been developed in Europe. So, Europe if you keep it outside then you know it is partially moist right I mean inside it is partially moist outside if it is continuously wet the values could be lower. So, this continuously wet scenario. Now, root T experimental validation has been shown by some people for example, most of it you know seems to fit with the root T curve this also seems to be fitting with root T curve. So, this is an artificial climate 20 degree centigrade and 65 percent relative humidity. So, 20 degree centigrade 65 percent RH this one is and this one is outdoor condition outdoor condition you know. So, there is lot of moisture condition is prevailing here and this is completely out of door flat this is of course, over a roof. So, this is more outdoor you know like exposed to rain this is more exposed to rain. So, what it shows is that root to relationship after all is quite often followed. So, this you know relationship although very simple. So, depth varies with root time that that becomes a kind of understanding that we try to develop or get we develop from this situation right. Now, we already said the degradation reaction in concrete takes place in most environment and concrete is not under fully saturated condition in tropical climate exposed concrete are subjected to wetting and drying even in western situation you know colder climates high altitude is actually under wetting and drying situation. Hence, moisture in the areas of concrete is necessary element in service life model. So, all models must look into the sweating and drying and if you look at it this look at it for example, let us say in in the our our kind of climatic condition this is your reinforcement bar and if it is you know critical moisture line there is a critical moisture content above which actually it will start it will start it will start carbonation will start. Now, then this case it is fully saturated in the beginning then it dries out you know as shown as if it is fully saturated it dries out to conducive moisture. So, above this moisture content there will be no carbonation critical moisture level. So, if it dries out so, this zone becomes now critical and carbonation proceeds this zone becomes critical and carbonation proceeds here carbonation proceeds here then the drying stops here suddenly wetting occurs which occurs at a very fast rate and then it has become actually saturated no carbonation will progress. So, carbonation will progress within only within this envelope and this process will repeated you will be repeated and you can see this in this diagram you know this process will repeat. Now, after this no carbonation there might be a drying period drying you know this there may be wetting period then this is all saturated situation no carbonation occurs it starts again when moisture content reduces below critical level continues with the same kind of slope same kind of relationship and in steps it actually happens. So, if you have cycles of wetting and drying right then carbonation will also progress in steps carbonation will also progress in steps right carbonation will progress in steps this is when it was fully wet if it was fully saturated, but if it was fully dry then also similar situation will progress the moisture front, but this will be more complex for example, you have fully dry then critical moisture level you know increasing critical moisture level here it will be more than critical moisture level and there will be critical moisture upper limit of critical moisture content lower limit of lower limit of critical moisture content upper limit of critical moisture content carbonation will only progress in between when it is fully dry and getting saturated. So, only beyond certain moisture level only beyond certain moisture level lower limit of critical moisture content above this is dry then moisture reaches a lower limit of critical moisture content carbonation and then as wetting is continuing this would be upper limit of critical moisture upper limit critical moisture. So, carbonation will progress only in between and this is during wetting phase once it has wetting wetting is over drying starts this will come back like this and this will also follow like this is longer because drying takes much longer time. So, carbonation will follow carbonation will follow you know only during the critical moisture situation modeling that is relatively difficult and people have not done any modeling on those so far. So, this is and but in the Indian tropical scenario it will be like that consider let us say situations of any any part of let us say let us say composite monsoon climate of central and northern India you have monsoon season of two months. So, this during this time period wetting will continue but after that drying starts and before the monsoon season it was fully dry. So, during the monsoon season wetting would start and the concrete will become moist and a conducive if the situation is conducive for the cover concrete carbonation will progress and winter comes it becomes more dry after monsoon season other September it tends to be dry it will possibly continue and when it becomes fully dry humidity becomes very low again it will cease to carbonation will cease. So, it will actually occur between some time from the month of you know during the monsoon period to the winter period after that it would stop when it has become fully dry and again start next year. So, you will have cycles of carbonation in exposed concrete in Indian scenario when it is exposed to rain of course, in any other condition it could be different. But you see other case the modeling is simple when you have a situation of you know originally saturated which could be in a condition of Europe where you know it is mostly saturated sometime it becomes dry then it will again become saturated. Now, moisture diffusion or moisture movement it can be expressed through what is called Richard's equation which you have not looked into here at the moment and it is Richard's equation which can be written like this d theta relative moisture content d t is equals to del d x of d which is a function of theta into d theta d x. So, let me write it like this del again let me write it clearly like again let me just write it clearly again you know it can be written like del theta d t where theta is relative moisture content del del x of d which is a function of theta del theta del x. This is Richard's equation and through this actually you can solve and find out the moisture profile however, it has been if you look at observed at this diagram you know one hour two hour drying, three hour drying, twelve hour drying even drying could be somewhat related to this however, the boundary condition will be different only the capillary moisture flow will be like this vapor transmission equation is also similar it can be also modeled in a similar manner. Whatever it is this is how drying follows drying follows and it can also be shown to be proportional to depth varies with root time it can be shown in a simple manner like we have done earlier in a simple model one can show depth versus root of time. Therefore, if this is my you know critical moisture line before that it was all saturated. So, relative humidity is 56 percent in 65 percent and this is wetting wetting is instant alias drying takes longer time. So, this could be the cycle of drying and wetting so drying and wetting right for a given concrete experimentally also somewhat this can be validated. So, then you will have actually the carbonation front will progress in this manner in the first cycle you see this is this one can approximate the wet drying and wetting because wetting in more or less instantaneous then again drying and wetting and there is a small gap drying and wetting small gap drying and wetting. So, this is the conducive moisture condition during which carbonation progress. So, carbonation progress is here but then it will not progress further till this point again progress in this manner stop here progress in this manner and it follows till it reaches the cover depth which is the cover depth is here this is your cover. So, it reaches the cover depth now one can simply one can see that during the second cycle the duration during which carbonation is occurring is smaller in the third cycle it is still smaller fourth cycle it will be still smaller fifth cycle it is smaller and so on so forth. Now, what is this time this is the time required for drying of the already carbonated depth. So, this is the time required for drying of the already carbonated depth you know this is the drying this is wetting drying wetting. So, this is the time required so the carbonation front in the first cycle reaches here then it remains constant second cycle it reaches there third cycle it reaches there and so on so forth. So, if you see the fourth cycle the carbonation will only start when the depth up to which fourth cycle carbonation is occurred the drying must must you know take place up to that depth. So, one can algebraically formulate a formula like this where B is the constant you know the moisture penetration depth if I call it x dash is B under root T because we said moisture penetration is also proportional to under root T. So, B is the constant of proportionality. So, x j j going from 1 to j minus 1 where this is x j is the carbonation is the carbonation depth progress of carbonation depth during jth cycle. So, sum up all the carbonation depth prior to jth cycle B divided by this because B is equals so we want to find out the T. So, T will be you know T would be x dash square x dash by B square x dash by B square right T would be x dash by B square. So, T would be x dash by B square so therefore, this square of this this gives me B divided by that gives me the time one over you know it gives me the time. So, total time required up to which drying you know try this time must be subtracted from total drying time total drying time minus this time must be subtracted this must be subtracted from drying time I think it is one over that it should be one over that because time would be x divided by B x divided by B or if I write it other round one by you know like B x dash is equals to root T B x dash is equals to root T. So, then I will have T equals to B x square now this this should be one over that one over that. So, this should be one over that one over B divided by this square. So, you can find out this time and k under root that will give you k because k is the constant of proportionality for carbonation. So, x j will be k one over this and this process every every cycle you can find out how much is the progress of carbonation time. So, actually let me write this out clearly x j is equals to T D where T D is the drying time that is this period which is constant for all you know wetting drying wetting drying cycle out the time every cycle time during which moisture condition is conducive. So, T D now if you look at x dash that is the moisture penetration depth B under root T. So, unit of B is actually distance or length divided by root over T root over T. So, if I square it up so x T would be x dash square by B square. So, B you know B square. So, what is unit of B is length root over T to the power half root over you know length T to the power half. So, length per per unit to the power minus half. So, therefore, this would be x you know this would be simply sigma x j j going from 1 to j minus 1 or x i going from divided by B square and whole of this thing should be under root multiplied by k. So, let me write it again clearly write this 1 clearly again let me write this one clearly again let me write this clearly again the x j at x j you know this let me raise this out actually and write clearly x j that is the carbonation depth at any cycle jth cycle will be given as k under root T D where T D is the cycle time or effective duration in every cycle during which carbonation can occur minus all put put it like this minus sigma x i i going from 1 to j minus 1 by B square. So, this would be the you know so, x j so, x j is the carbonation depth progress of carbonation depth in jth cycle progress of carbonation depth in jth cycle and this you can repeat and find out. So, this is how this is how we find out this is how we can actually model this well, but what what is important for us to understand is actually what is important for us and when it reaches the cover depth service life as well. So, what is important for us to understand is that the carbonation progresses in steps and it would depend upon wetting and drying cycle right. This is a simple model this a model for a specific condition actual condition should be model under wetting and drying. If you have a crack carbonation can penetrate along this direction if you have a crack carbonation can penetrate along this direction. So, diffusion of carbon dioxide first into the crack and then inside. So, in a crack concrete carbonation front might reach in this manner carbonation concrete front might reach in this manner. So, if you have rebar somewhere it is coming then there is a problem what is protection against carbonation moisture and air is necessary water saturated concrete exhibits lower rate of earth. So, keep concrete out of moisture time when carbonation front reaches the river level that is we have understood and impervious surface concrete lower water cement ratio adequate cover depth improved protection against carbonation. So, this is all about carbonation. Now, we can look into chloride we have two types of you know when we are measuring chloride we have two types of chloride. For example, you take some concrete grind it to powder and dissolve it in acid you get acid soluble chloride. I mean you actually dissolve it in HNO 3 6 normal HNO 3 concentrated nitric acid then you get acid soluble chloride dissolve it in distilled water and find out by silver nitrate test the quantity of chloride that is water soluble chloride that is water soluble chloride you know that is water soluble chloride. So, we distinguish two types of chlorides in concrete one is water soluble another is a soluble. Depassivation takes place when chloride level reaches a critical value at the river this is sometime called threshold chloride level and it depends upon cement and steel types. It depends upon cement and steel types and service life is defined with respect to above depassivation. Of course, internal chloride is the chloride coming from in gradients and IS 456 2000 tells you that this internal chloride which is acid soluble chloride total chloride you know should be less than 0.4 or 0.6 kg per meter cube for RCC for priestess concrete 0.4 kg per meter cube. So, this is total chloride is important for in gradients because some of the acid soluble chloride may turn to be water soluble chloride in future. So, if you have sufficient chloride right in the beginning the T p depassivation time could be 1 0. So, it is important that keep the new concrete free of chloride or below the values that has been suggested in the code 0.4 kg per meter cube or 0.6 kg per meter. Some of the total chloride remain physically and chemically bound some chloride with the cement like C 3 A reacting with calcium chloride gives you chloroeluminate salts and higher C 3 A therefore, improves the chloride binding. So, this is a chemically combined chloride these are called fredel salt right. So, chloroeluminate salts they are fredel salts and C 3 A bind C some could be physically adsorbed and they are also immobile not able to move not water soluble. So, chemically bound chloride as not water soluble and they would not contribute to depassivation but they can later on become soluble there could be a problem. So, therefore, total chloride when we are measuring with acid soluble chloride that actually includes the bound chloride and free chloride both. So, free chloride bound chloride both are there right acid soluble chloride indicates total chloride and water soluble chloride indicates free chloride. So, total minus free chloride gives you the brown boundary total minus free chloride gives you bound chloride. Sources of chloride in concrete well if it is fresh concrete it may come from ingredients chloride contaminated aggregates, admixtures containing chloride which is of course, restricted this days mixing water quite often ground water contaminated chloride if it is used in concrete and that is the case in many of the North Indian scenario. And then in hardened concrete because they can come from outside deicing salts that is very common in northern I mean developed you know northern countries, Europe or United States of America, chloride salts were used as deicing salts, sea water and marine structures chloride can come we have discussed this earlier and soil and ground water containing chloride salts. So, these are sources of chloride. So, these are called internal chloride these are external chloride which will come through in gas. Chloride content at reinforcement level at which corrosion initiation takes place are called threshold chloride, but it will vary with the cement type, c3 a content of cement because cement type mix proportion, steel type not all steel will get depacitated for example, a corrosion steel may not get depacitated easily. So, sources of chloride penetration it will depend upon that also. So, all put together the threshold chloride will vary from cement to cement still to till, still. So, that it cannot be unique, unique it cannot be unique. And therefore, you find that various codes have different values you know for example, IS 456 we said this for RCC only 0.6 kg per meter cube, Si 220 0.20 by mass of cement as it soluble chloride 318 0.15 by mass of cement water soluble chloride. So, this is soluble this water soluble BS 8 1 1 0.4 percent by mass of chloride and this is for total chloride and Australian standard 0.8 kg per meter cube of concrete as a soluble chloride. So, this is varies and also it must be varying because of the experience also in various with the cement type and steel type. One thing we must remove remember that carbonation as well as chloride is not a problem per say for concrete except for of course, carbonation shrinkage. It is actually problem of the reinforcement because they initiate the reinforcement corrosion. So, for concrete they are not problem. So, therefore, we should address actually reinforcement corrosion or some indicators of reinforcement corrosion whether it is initiated or not with respect to chloride as well as carbonation. Right. So, in saturated concrete if the concrete is saturated the concentration of chloride ion will be high here and it may not be there inside chloride may diffuse by fixed diffusion equation. And actually for charge particle it is electrical potential. Now, if there is a concentration gradient of the charge particles then the potential will also there will be a potential gradient also existing and that will cause driving of the chloride you know ions chloride ions. So, that is what we looked into in saturated condition chloride ions. Chlorid ions actually in saturated condition you know chloride ions chloride ions in saturated condition chloride ions are penetrating this are chloride ions. So, as the chloride ion penetrates they this you know high chloride ion concentration higher potential here less chloride ion concentration lower potential. So, chloride ion move because of potential difference and it also can be expressed in form of the fixed diffusion equation same fixed diffusion equation in terms of right. So, this is the flux here and if you look at the mass balance then it can be written like this if DCL is a function of the you know it if this this can be simplified if DCL is not a function of the chloride concentration this can be taken out or of the space then it can be taken out. So, if it is not a function of space or the chloride concentration itself can taken out and it will be a linear equation. So, this is what it is mass balance will show you this kind of an equation this is the flux coming in and rate of change of this flux is rate of flux whatever you know chloride coming in must must minus going out must go on increasing the concentration that is the idea conservation of mass. So, this is the flux rate of change of flux with space that must be equals to change in concentration of the chloride within that space. So, finally, this is the diffusion equation this is the diffusion d is the independent of x and concentration and therefore, you can simply write this kind of an equation you can simply write this kind of equation. But this is only valid for saturated condition this is only valid for saturated condition. Now, solution of fixed diffusion equation for specific boundary condition is available, but it can be solved today with finite element and so many types of tools available it is not really difficult to solve. So, you can solve it and since you can solve it therefore, since you can solve it therefore, it is not very difficult to use this. But most commonly people have adopted to a specific solution for a specific boundary condition for example, for a specific boundary condition of sudden change of surface chloride for a thick wall this is available for heat transfer situation for example, this is the boundary condition for infinitely thick wall you know a semi infinite medium where T less than 0 concentration was C 0 everywhere and T greater than 0 at x equals to 0 this is your system at x equals to 0 this semi infinite medium this is infinity at x equals to 0 suddenly you have changed the chloride concentration to C s. Well, other side it has still remain same C 0 it was not change the solution is given by error function solution solution is given by you know this is the condition at x equals to infinity it is always C 0 here x equals to 0 it suddenly change to C s for this solution is available and this is given by C x T at any point the chloride concentration is given as C s where C s is the surface concentration which is kept constant plus C 0 minus C s C 0 is initial concentration and at you know x equals to infinity it still remains same minus C s into error function Gauss's error function of x by 2 D where D is the diffusion coefficient and T is time where error function of any y is any variable is given by this equation. So, this is a known solution but this is not valid for all situations although apparently lot of people use this for all kind of situation it is only valid for saturated chloride saturated condition that means, possibly where no splush zone submerged concrete concentration outside is constant tranquil water no change in concentration and this boundary condition is followed it cannot be used everywhere but that is what has been done quite often and error function complementary is called 1 minus Erf y guess you know so, this value will vary from 0 to 1 and 1 minus this error function y is complementary error function and you can actually get you know error function is equals to 0 error function infinity is equals to 1. So, it varies from 0 to 1 therefore, 1 minus this is called complementary error function and 1 can use this. So, for C 0 equals to 0 this equation can be written in this manner that is initial chloride concentration is 0. One can write it in this manner where x is any distance D is the diffusion coefficient and T is the time replacing C D T is equals to you know at the covered depth it is as threshold. So, this C x T I replace it by D x equals to D at x equals to D and at time sometime C is equals to T h then I get C T h on this side is equals to C f where this is equals to D this is the then this T is the service line this T is the service line then when the chloride level at the reval level at the D is the cover depth at the reval level has reached threshold and one can actually the formula may be approximated by a parabolic function like this error function it can be you know actually approximated by a parabolic function and you can get service life like this an expression for service life like this right. But there are lot of uncertainty in this one for example, C T h as we said is various there are you know threshold values would depend upon cement type steel type etcetera etcetera and it is not constant it is not sure how you measure the diffusion coefficient there is no way really systematic way to measure the diffusion coefficient. So, T 0 is the initiation time or T p is deep as diffusion time this and a lot of people use this calculation but this is absolutely inaccurate one can possibly use experience rather than using something which does not exactly represent the real life situation not the exact boundary condition saturated concrete is a rare but people do use them. Unseatured at concrete concrete is mostly unsaturated and this flux concentration dependent flux is same as earlier we talked about but the chloride can migrate with solution because the unsaturated solution can go in. So, chloride can not migrate sorry chloride chloride can ingest migration is under electric field. So, ingest it can go under the capillary suction and that flux is much higher usually. So, you know in plus zone and foundation or many other places where concrete is unsaturated one can use this. So, unsaturated concrete is the most important one and equation for this is fairly complex. I just take half a minute and conclude our discussion on this and continue on the next lecture on the same one. Now, you can see that this is the flux of chloride D is the diffusion coefficient. So, this is under concentration gradient this could be under activation you know because reaction might be taking place and if there is external potential applied the migration can be occurring. So, migration potential activation potential reaction actually activity reaction potential and this is due to the suction water suction you know the capillary suction or solution flux. Now, this flux is much more than this flux and this is the diffusion coefficient. So, if you are looking at the total flux that should be some of the solution flux plus the flux this may not be there if there is no external field you can neglect this at least two fluxes one must consider. And one since there is a total chloride and free chloride one must look at the mass balance of the total chloride and under such condition you know one must take the equation will turn out to be this flux change is equals to some bind chloride binding factor must be taken into account. So, equation would be much more complex than what actually we have done. Therefore, airf function solution does not represent real situation in most of the cases in any manner it does not chloride binding this is the factor of chloride binding total chloride to free chloride ratio you must balance the total chloride and the flux rate of change of flux which you have used earlier it will be something like this. So, quickly we can look into you know cause of depassivation can be diagnosed from chloride concentration if you have both chloride some diagrams are available for example, carbonation depth to cover depth 1 the risk is relatively low. But if it is more than one that is carbonation only chloride is relatively less here both chloride and carbonation carbonation is less but chloride is high risk of corrosion is high here both carbonation and chloride is high risk of corrosion is high this is high. So, chloride risk is high both carbonation and chloride is only carbonation chloride is not there and it has not reached to the cover depth risk of corrosion is low otherwise if it is close the cover depth carbonation is crop the cover depth but chloride is low moderate this zone is moderate where carbonation is less but chloride is threshold well these are some guidelines available but may not be very you know it can be used in in C2 concrete chloride concrete chloride diffusion coefficient it has been seen that sulphate resistance cement gives you high chloride diffusion coefficient compared to slag or you know slag of easy combination or fly as of official combination. So, sulphate resistance cement is no good for chloride situation. Blended cement however, controls the corrosion kinetics much better that is well understood they you know but with respect to carbonation of course, we have already said that is meant will be very good. I think I think we will close down here and starts from you know like basically protection same as some some of the total chloride remain physically and chemically bound with cement that is what we said. So, protection would be this this already we have seen blend cement performs better. So, you know what we have seen is protection would mean impervious concrete impervious concrete C 3 higher C 3 but C 3 I would actually do well as well as chloride high C I R C 3 improves chloride binding but may not do sulphate very well while slag cement is better for both sulphate as well as chloride. So, higher C 3 improves chloride right and impervious surface concrete lower water cement ratio adequate cover depth PPC etcetera improves chloride. Threshold chloride depends on steel blended cement performs better and initiation period depends on steel type ratio is a suitable chloride what is a little chloride is this that is gamma values is something like this. So, if you have a crack then chloride can penetrate and it can cause what is called pitting corrosion that is what is shown here. So, with this we can actually summarize our discussion we have looked into carbonation and chloride together and as far as chloride is concerned we said that the C 3 A it gives better binding carbonation impervious concrete and low water cement ratio is always better and you know deep acidation time we have looked into we have looked into some of the models and with this thank you. === Lecture 32 Transcript === Welcome to module 8 lecture 4. So we looked into carbonation and chloride and initiation of corrosion that is depassivation by these two agents in the last lecture. Today we will look into and also in the beginning in the in the in the previous lecture lecture before the last we looked into corrosion, introduction to corrosion. We also explained that what it is what it is actually in electrochemical process and all that. So we will follow up from there more about corrosion today. So what we will do is we will look at corrosion potential because it is an electrochemical process we will look at connect kinetics and effect and protection. You see if you recollect we talked about there will be a node and cathode formation within the metal. So if this is my metal if this is my this is my metal if this is my metal this is my metal. So there will be some place where there will be a node formation. So let us say this is my anode and this is my cathode. So in anode Fe goes out into the solution Fe dissolves to Fe plus plus and 2 electron. Now electron moves along this direction to the cathode and it reacts with oxygen and water forming hydroxyl ion and Fe goes into solution reacts with this hydroxyl ion forming Fe OH 2 etcetera etcetera. So you have a node and the cathode. Now since the electron is moving along this direction since if I call the and we talked about there is a double layer there is a potential at the metal and potential at the electrolyte there are two potentials we talked about. Let us denote them by Fe. So Fe Ma is a potential in the metal at a node that means I am talking of this potential Fe Ma and Fe Ma must be less than Fe Ma C must be less than Fe Ma C why because electron is moving along this direction. Fe Ma is moving along this direction so Fe Ma C must be greater than Fe Ma where Fe stands for the potential at the metal. Potential at the metal right so we said that there is a variation of the potential from the metal surface to the solution and we talked about two three models Helmholtz you know and finally Starns model and all that. So we talked about so we are talking of the potential here and since electron moves from here to here so this potential must be more than this potential. So Fe Ma C is greater than Fe Ma and if you come here the positive ion moves along this direction in other words Fe electrolyte A at the anode must be greater than Fe electrolyte anode must be greater than Fe electrolyte at the cathode. So potential here at the anode is less than potential at the cathode and if you come to the electrolyte potential at the anode is greater than potential at the cathode potential at the cathode. So if you come to the electrolyte potential at the you know it is because Fe ion is moving along this direction electron is moving along this direction. So now if I subtract the potential Fe Ma Fe Ma minus Fe Ma that is at the anode itself at the anode itself let me just draw it again let me just draw it again you know at anode itself let me just write it let me just write it at the anode itself find out the potential difference find out the potential difference Fe Ma C 5 Ma C minus Fe electrolyte anode. Now Fe Ma C this is one potential and other potential is Fe Ma C cathode minus Fe electrolyte Fe Ma C cathode minus Fe electrolyte cathode. So if I consider this two potential now Fe metal cathode was greater than Fe metal anode. So this is greater than this this is greater than this this is greater than this this is greater than this and I am subtracting this it is and this is greater than this and this is greater than this. So you see Fe this is greater than this is greater this bigger then this bigger than this so this is greater than this and this is smaller than this. So I am subtracting a larger value from a smaller value larger value then a smaller value and here from a larger value to a smaller value. smaller value. So, I am subtracting larger value from a smaller value and subtracting here smaller value from a larger value. So, in other words what I can say is this will be greater than the phi m a minus phi a. The difference in potential at the n-ode between the metal and the electrolyte electrode will be less than that in cathode. That is what we are trying to say that is what we are trying to say you know this is what we are trying to say and we define this as electrode potential. So, what is electrode potential phi m minus phi e that is electrode potential and we have seen that e a should is less than e c e a as less than e c because that is shown by this expression that is shown by this expression phi m a minus phi e a is less than phi m c minus phi m you know phi e c. So, phi m a minus phi e a is less than phi m c minus phi e c. So, electrode potential which is e a is less than e a is less than e c. So, e a is less than e c. So, electrode potential at the n-ode is smaller than less is lower than electrode potential at. So, that is what we call as electrode potential it is the difference between the potential of the metal minus you know and the electrolyte at any electrode. Now, how do I measure that I cannot directly measure this I can only indirectly measure it I cannot directly measure this potential between the electrolyte and the metal is impossible to measure this at the interface potential difference is difficult to measure. So, what you do we measure it indirectly and using some external electrode some reference electrode. Now, the potential of the reference electrode that is taken as 0 is hydrogen electrode. So, hydrogen electrode is one what has got what has got a platyneized platinum and you pass hydrogen in distilled water you know hydrogen pass hydrogen at one atmosphere pressure and at unit activity concentration of hydrogen is unity. Potential is 0 and the standard hydrogen potential. So, standard hydrogen potential is measured under standard condition when you have got a platyneized electrode in hydrogen situation which is constant or activity being 1 and atmospheric pressure you know that is called standard hydrogen potential and we call it as 0. So, the reaction is H 2 gets broken down into H plus plus plus 2 electron. So, this is this is a kind of an you know this H 2 breaks down into 2 H plus ion hydrogen ion plus electrode and corresponding to this reaction the potential is taken to be 0. All other potentials are measured with respect to this for example, the most commonly used one for reinforced concrete is copper copper sulphate electrode and for this the copper copper sulphate electrode this value is 0.3 2 volt with respect to standard hydrogen electrode 320 millivolt minus 320 millivolt minus 320 millivolt. So, hydrogen electrode is considered 0 copper copper electrode is minus 320 millivolt or minus 3 2 volt. So, any if you measure with respect to copper copper sulphate reference electrode then you want to express it in hydrogen electrode terms you have to make this kind of difference addition or subtraction as required. So, copper minus 2 electrode of of course, it will be plus. So, if it is the direction is this copper 2 copper minus 2 electron is then it will I will call it point pass to 3 2 volt and if it is copper breaking down to copper and 2 electron. So, I will call it minus 3 2 minus 3 2 volt depends upon which side is the electrons are. So, for for for concrete system the ASTM 876 this gives you a reference electrode copper copper sulphate reference electrode copper copper sulphate copper copper sulphate reference electrode where you have a you know weighted sponge here this saturated copper sulphate solution this is a copper rod C U rod copper rod connected to a high resistance volt meter high resistance volt meter high resistance volt meter and one point is connected to the rebar exposed rebar this is your reinforcement bar this is the concrete this must be wet enough. So, the potential between this point and this reference electrode is measured by this volt meter and this is the half cell for this we call it half cell potential because this is the half cell the other cell is formed by the rebar and the electrolyte here concrete pore solution. And if this potential measured is less than minus 3 50 milli volt milli volt less than minus 3 milli volt the chance of corrosion is 90 percent according to their empirical observations in chloride red and concrete in you know. They found it if it is more negative than minus 3 50 milli volt chance of corrosion is 90 percent 90 percent of the time. But if it is between 250 and 350 milli volt minus 350 minus 250 minus 350 milli volt there will be 50 percent chance that means it may be corroded or it may not be and if it is less than more positive than minus 250 more positive than minus 250 is more positive than minus 250 then chance of corrosion is only 10 percent. So, by doing a survey over actual site one can actually demarcate the areas of high disc active corrosion and low risk active corrosion using this however this is also used for laboratory measurement as well. Now, what is the basis of this you know so you go to look a little bit of thermodynamics and talking terms of potentials which comes. Now, you see the reaction takes place actually here electrochemical reactions are taking place. So, reaction takes place and in the reaction what takes part is a free energy. Now, what is free energy some energy will be bound with the entropy some energy will be bound with the entropy and that is not available for the reaction right. So, if some energy goes in changing the entropy that will not be bound for available for reaction. So, if it is only isothermal process there will be no internal energy you know that will be because it is only temperature is not changing. So, there is no change in internal energy right of the system as long as it is in same temperature, but chemical reaction if it is occurring internal energy of the species reactants and the products could be different. But some of this difference can be consumed you know it might go in changing the entropy. So, remaining energy is what we call as free energy, but more important for us this is and this is available for an isothermal process that is for our reaction, but what is more important for us is when it is same pressure the free energy that is available. Now, it is the enthalpy because it is it is the total internal energy total heat content of the mid body you know which can change. So, delta H it could be the change, but delta H will not be responsible or will not be contributing towards the reaction because some of the energy will be associated with entropy change from we know from thermodynamics. So, G is called free energy and it is H minus T S this is energy associated with entropy this is energy associated with entropy and this free energy is what takes part in what you know what it is exchanging or what take what what influences the reaction process chemical or electro chemical reaction process. So, if I have N moles of A reacting with N B moles of B and the product form is N C moles of B and the product form is N C moles of C and N B moles of D this is a kind of reaction that is occurring then delta G there is a change in the gives free energy that is G product minus G reactants that governs whether the reaction will progress or not. For example, if this this is high you know high and this is low. So, this will be negative and in that case the reaction can proceed spontaneously, but if this is high this is low you have to supply that energy. So, one can write delta G you know in this manner because free energy per mole is known. So, N C G C one can write in this manner N C G C minus N D G D etcetera etcetera and at standard reference condition we call it delta G 0 which would be N C G C at the standard 0 stands for standard reference condition of you know possibly one concentrations or one etcetera etcetera understand at condition it will be given like this. So, therefore, one can write if for a given species let us say L species like A here B N L G L minus G 0 it can be shown that it is actually N L RT N by L L. L is the activity or it can be replaced by concentration in most of the cases. You know when cases ideal laws are followed by concentration where real cases activity would be a better situation. So, but we will replace this by concentration you can understand this because since the constant pressure situation so pressure constant pressure situation you know the volume change will take place. So, P D V is the work done would be and one can write P as RT by B and when you integrate it you will get L N you know B 2 by B 1 etcetera etcetera and one by B can be expressed in terms of concentration and for that is why it comes RT L N this way. So, from chemical thermodynamics one can derive this I think we will not go into this derivation but what will be interested in delta G G products minus G reactants can be written you know for this expression it can be written like this delta G can be written as delta G 0 RT L N concentrations activities are replaced by concentration and they would be written in this manner like we did from here right like we said for here it can be and this can be in fact written as RT L N concentration of you know species L to the power N L. So, for any species so for A B C D I can write for such equations G L minus G 0 or delta G minus delta G 0. So, I can write you know I can write for delta G minus delta G 0 and delta G minus delta G 0 and rest all since I have replaced the activity by concentration I can write it by this. Now, this was actually free energy and this can be written using Ferraris law for charge transfer where charge is in pole you know you remember the potential is basically the energy on one charge and if I have Z is the number of electron transfer that takes place or the balance of that you know species that is taking part in an electrochemical reaction F is the number of coulombs charge associated with one gram mole and this is associated with one mole this G is associated with one mole. So, Z multiplied by F will be the total charge associated with one mole and E is the potential for unit charge. So, E multiplied by E is the potential is the energy actually work done for unit charge. So, multiplied by the total charge charge can be related to delta G you know delta G. So, when I am dealing with charges it will be Z F E. So, this reaction can be written if I if Z electron is involved in the electron is involved in the electrochemical reaction this reaction can be written as Z F E is equals to minus you know minus Z F E is equals to Z F E E 0 where E 0 is something analogous to Z this or equivalent to this is Z F E 0 and this concentration still remains same because electron concentration one will not take. So, one would get by dividing by Z F all the sides R T by Z F you get what is called non-stickation. So, what it shows is the electrode potential in an where there is a charge transfer is taking place in an electrochemical reaction charge transfer takes place the electrode potential can be written in terms of standard electrode potential that is electrode potential under standard condition and can be expressed in terms of the concentration of the species involved in the reaction. For example, if I have you know like R is equals to F equals to and temperature R D because it was R T divided by Z F right. So, 2.3 because it was L N L N can be converted into log L N can be converted into log. So, it will be 2.303 you know R T by F is 059 and I can write the expression as E 0.059 Z this and for hydrogen of course, for hydrogen case of hydrogen we can write this because you know hydrogen this value is 0 E 0 is 0 standard because we take it to be 0 under standard condition you know that is one atmospheric condition unit concentration and so on so forth. And for any other hydrogen ion concentration the electrode potential will be given by this where this is the hydrogen ion concentration and this is the pressure or you know related to activity and all that. So, for for concentration of pressure being unity this will be SH will be 0. For various other reaction this values are available I just want to make one point for example, lithium this is negative but if you come to gold A U stands for gold it is 1.498 positive silver it is positive platinum it is positive which means that so as long as it is negative the reaction will occur spontaneously or it will occur you know but if it is positive it will not. So, no matter metals have got their electrode potential positive they do not become they do not form a node the dissolution of you know this reaction do not take place they are readily while in case of other ions such as FE this reaction will occur it will act as a node. So, you connect FE with gold FE will automatically become a node and gold will be cathode similarly platinum anyone on this side of hydrogen if you connect to anyone on this side they will tend to be cathode and the one more negative than hydrogen would tend to be a node and this is important in sacrificial a node selection and all that. For typical cathodic reaction in case of FE ion corrosion this is plus 401. So, one can actually calculate this one for various reactions for various reactions for example you know this reaction FE dissolved into FE that is the iron dissolution at a node this reaction one can find out E and it would one would write it like this you know the FE ion log of FE ion concentration or activity of FE ion will play a role and if I put FE ion concentration is tend to be minus 6 I can I will get it E as a constant E as a constant and this is essentially this line. So, E is constant if I put some concentration values of FE because this is concentration this will relate to concentration 2.303 etcetera you know we have already written 0.0 if you come to this equation 0.059 by 2 or 0.059 by 2 here 2 here in case of iron reaction because FE dissolved into FE plus plus plus 2 electron. So, you put here 2 it will be 0.03 and here the FE ion concentration will be there. So, if you put FE ion concentration is tend to be a minus 6 tend to be a minus 6 moles per litre you will get this line this line. So, if the concentration is more than this it means the corrosion is occurring if it is less than this the corrosion is not occurring. So, one can identify theoretically zone of immunity and zone of corrosion. Similarly for various other reactions one can get this curves and where which product is stable that one can find out using NARS equation this diagram is called per week's diagram. Now, if you look at this line this is actually this line is for you know oxygen evolution. So, the equation here corrosion this line correspond to this this reaction this line corresponds to this reaction water oxygen forms for you know cathodic reaction 4 hydroxyl ion this line for cathodic reaction all right. Now, if you if you calculate out pH OH can be replace OH ion concentration can be replaced by pH actually because we know the concentration of when you write down the NARS equation for this I will have concentration of hydroxyl ion. So, concentration of hydroxyl ion that is OH can be replaced by this can be replaced by concentration of hydrogen ion and I know the log hydrogen ion negative of log hydrogen ion concentration is pH. So, pH can be replaced by 14 minus POH or in other words POH because this will be log of hydrogen ion concentration and negative of log of hydrogen hydroxyl ion concentration that can be written into pH terms. So, you can see that is linearly varying with pH E is equals to E 0 0 9 pH. So, there are similarly many other for various other reactions you can get pH varying equations for example, this reaction which can be a cathodic reaction under certain condition hydrogen evolution reaction for this you get this line this dotted line bottom line A bottom line A for this reaction you get B. So, you get actually equation related to pH. So, it it you know various pH linear equation in pH. So, various other reactions similarly which are function of where hydrogen ion concentration or hydroxyl ion concentration is involved you can get equations and this diagram is called pore mix diagram given by pore mix. Here in this zone ion concentration is very little and thought to be immune zone in this zone ion concentration is relatively high and he arbitrarily choose this value if it is more than that this is corrosion this is corrosion where this ion is stable in this zone this specification F E 3 O 4 is stable and so on so forth. So, zones of pH pH and potential combination where various products are stable or you know possibly possible product formation that can take place is shown shown from can be seen from pore mix diagram. So, it shows that at high pH's values high pH values you may have you know somewhere around these values depending upon the potential you might have stable you know passive layer formation like F E 3 O 4. Some other cases this may form and some other cases low pH corrosion can occur and so on so forth. So, that is pore mix diagram and that tells us and what potential and pH range what kind of product formation can occur. Similar diagram is available for chloride also potential pH diagram showing domains of corrosion behavior for you know solution containing chloride ion at constant some constant concentration. So, this kind of diagrams can be obtained theoretically but you can obtain from experimental situation also for example, when you do something called anodic polarization that means, you supply current to an electrode we will just talk about this a little bit more later on and you find that the corrosion proceed in the beginning and then suddenly the current reduces we will come back to this we will explain this again further. So, you can have zones of active corrosion passive situation where oxides have form current has got reduced corrosion rate is measured in terms of current because you know we talked of charge transfer F E I and dissolving. So, when current is less corrosion rate is less so suddenly corrosion current has become less because of oxide has been formed that oxide layer has been formed and then this is called passive zone this called trans passive zone and so on so forth immune zone in below this and etcetera etcetera. So, one can actually experimental also determine something similar to pore mix diagram and verify the scenario for various concentration situation. So, experimentally determine zones of corrosion is also possible now this was as far as potential is concerned. Now, when you connect we go to the galvanic cell again supposing I have got copper and zine and you remember you know it is in copper sulphate solution there is a boundary here of course, zine sulphate solution and we said that their potential will differ and when we connect them actually current will flow. If I put a resistor you know if I put a resistor now I will see there is a potential change. So, originally potential if I measure it without this resistor this is a high resistance voltmeter I will find a potential difference or potential here also I can measure with respect to some reference electrode and here also with respect to some reference electrode you know and this is the zine potential copper potential when I have measured them with respect to some standard reference electrode and put them here when I have connected them then the potential difference between them will change and it will become I R I the current passing through them and I R. So, there is a change in the potential there is a change in the potential depending upon the R and this is I R you know this this this is actually we call the potential here is got actually polarized it has got change. So, when actual current is passing potential actually changes because what happens there is a electrical double layer in the boundary and some current has to pass through that as well and as you know some current has to pass through that. So, the finally some loss of drop would be there there as well. So, finally the I R drop across the resistance would be much less than this difference it will be much less than this difference because there will be some drop across the electrical double layer and that is that is why the polarization occurs. So, this I R drop across a resistance we call it as omic polarization because I have collected a resistance this is occurring. Now, this occurs in galvanic cell this can occur even in case of corrosion cell. It can occur when concentration of one of the reaction reactants you know reacting species is less for example, oxygen is less the the cathodic current may not pass and therefore, the corrosion process will become slower. So, this is called concentration polarization if the resistivity between the media you know when there is a two corrosion corrosion anode and cathode in the corrosion cell if there is a resistance within that media is high then the current passing would be relatively less. I had drop across the resistance will be less right. So, the corrosion current will be controlled by this resistivity or resistance of the media and that is actually is occurring omic polarization. But sometime I might apply current from outside voltage or current from outside and that is called activation polarization and that is used to study actually you know study or measure corrosion rate etcetera etcetera this activation polarization is used. But that gives us also the understanding because the kind of polarization that would occur that depends upon that actually depends upon then original condition or original corrosion that process that was going on in the corrosion cell. Now, this activation when I am applying more additional current from outside when this ion is actually participating in oxidation or reduction reaction it must discard any molecule solvating molecule to which it was there. So, if you are associated with some molecule or some situation it must discard or get out of it and migrate through the electrode solution interface and adjust its hydration sphere as it receives or discard electron. So, either it will discard electron supposing if it is in metal so metal to it goes to the solution. So, discard all you know if it is a solid solution in the metal it discard the solvating molecule come out of that migrate and move to the solution now and at you know if it is taking electron or giving away electron then it must change its hydration sphere and so on so forth and in this process actually it need some you know some energy would be needed. So, a species already in inner plane must just patch and migrate into the bulb. So, if it is in the inner plane or the metal it must migrate into the bulb. If it is in the already in the solution it has to come it must discard its solvating molecule and then you know get into pass through the interface and get into the bulk metal. So, both these cases would need some energy and this activation energy would be needed. So, energy is required for transition from one state to other so we call it activation energy. So, if I am supplying current actually I am giving activation energy. So, let us say this was the energy state originally and you have to supply some energy in order to jump from this state and come back to this state right. So, activation is required so jump from law level to you know this state to other state and net current actually species it works both ways net current supplied current density will be the anodic process current of anodic process minus the cathodic current. If I am supplying current in a given way I have pushed it up. So, actually both this process will continue simultaneously and net current will be given by Z f some constant multiplied by the concentration of oxidant concentration of reductant. Actually first order reaction essentially you know this comes out from the fact that I will just come to this I will come back to this first order reaction molar concentration double layer. So, first order reaction actually is product flux is proportional to k into species flux you know it is proportional to k into species flux. So, therefore, some constant first order reaction reaction rate is 2 is proportional to concentration of the reactant. So, that is why some k is coming in and from Arhania's equation one can find out this k as this relationship is there L n is equals to L n k you know this is the kind of relationship and one can find out k is proportional to activation energy divided by RT. So, kinetic energy increase with T and activation energy is given by depicts the reactant towards the product directs the reactant towards the product. So, anyway it is a function of temperature and it can be shown that k is e to the power e a divided by RT. So, this is the process of reaction reactant has been pushed up this jumps from the you know and comes to the product level. So, that is activation. Oxidant these are the molar concentration of the oxidized and reduced may you know reactants or reduced out layer outside double layer outside the reduced material outside the electrical double layer. First order reaction is proportional to k species therefore, rate of oxidation and rate of reduction can be written like this. So, at any matter the total place both anode can current cathodic current works simultaneously. Both would be working simultaneously and net current will be the difference between these two. So, oxidation current is given by this or you know reduction for this reaction the anode current will be like this and cathodic current will be given by like this and etichyli brum these two currents are same therefore, no net current is possible. So, if I am supplying some current then some current should be passing through it and this k can be replaced by according to R N S reaction I can replace by the free energy divided by RT which is activation energy and for this case also I can replace this by activation energy i a and i c can be replaced like z f some constant into e to the power activation energy divided by RT and ba activation energy to the power RT. Net current will be difference between these two and one can write it like this net current at the electrode if I am applying current then it will be given by this. But you know delta g can be replaced by some alpha f e a because it is you know some f into alpha into e a activation energy activation potential energy can be related to the potential in this manner similarly beta f e c that we have discussed earlier and we can write it in this manner alpha beta f e c divided by RT and alpha f e a divided by RT you know in this manner we can write it equilibrium current density if the equilibrium this two will be same. So if I call this as i 0 I will get this kind of relationship this will be same z f e b so this will be 0 and this will be also e 0 this will be also e 0 and then if I write i c by i 0 i c by i 0 when it is not at equilibrium then at any other current when there is a net current flowing you know so this will be i c by i 0 can be written like this because z f will cancel out it will be left to e to the power beta f e c minus e 0 and e a minus e 0. So if I shift it from an equilibrium potential to some potential I will give additional by giving activation energy this sort of a relationship will be followed this is this difference is called over potential they are called over potential. So if I have supplied some additional current I will actually change its activation energy and the potential will change difference between the equilibrium potential to the new potential I call it over potential and what I see is i c by i 0 i a by i 0 is given by this kind of an equation. If I take log of both sides I get what is known as Tefl's equation so n c I will get n nu c nu c is nothing but over potential nu a this is nu c and this is nu a and if I take log ln or log of both sides I will get some constant I call it Tefl's constant anodic constant cathodic constant and log of i c by i 0. So these are called Tefl's curve so if I apply current I will find that actually log of current versus over potential you know log of current versus over potential that is linearly because this is a linear kind log of cathodic and anodic potential over potential it would actually in a single electrode if I do that I will get this sort of relationship so these are called Tefl's relationship so that is how I see anodic and cathodic if I polarize I get this sort of curve right. So this is activation polarization and as I already said concentration and activation and atomic polarization you have already defined them this was activation polarization. Now Volmar-Balt Butler equation of course gives you for a single electrode the net current equation and this is related to this what it says is potential is now applied when we apply to the metal the ionization rate increases and reverse reaction will reduce. So if I apply in a given it a single electrode if I try to increase anodic current cathodic current will reduce and the relationship of beta and alpha will be beta is equals to 1 minus alpha so that is how is you know this is Volmar-Balt Butler's equation for single electrode. But really electrode single electrode both anodic and cathodic reaction goes on simultaneously and actual potential will depend upon those but in react corrosion cell you have actually anodic and cathod where both anodic and cathodic reaction is going simultaneously but depending upon where it is polarize it will act like cathode or it will act like anode and mixed electrode situation is what is modeled for actual corrosion process. So actual corrosion process is cathode is a mixed electrode single electrode anod you know mixed electrode situation is talked about. Now where it is related this activation polarization can be used for measurement of corrosion. So rate measurement linear polarization technique is used where I actually partar apply some current from outside over a small range where it is been observed that although it follows Tefl's relationship in the long run when I have polarized over a very short range of potential change it follows a linear line for example over this range it follows linear relationship up to this where this follows log logarithmically linear this just directly linear and this in this zone I can use polarization resistance polarization resistance and I can use stun gear equation to find out the corrosion current density. So I core is given by B divided by RP where RP is called polarization resistance which is nothing but delta E over delta I for small current for small current applied such that this does not change more than plus minus 20 millivolt such that this does not change more than plus minus 20 millivolt and B over RP beta is called stun gear constant you know RP is the polarization resistance and it is given as beta I beta C where these are Tefl's constant which we discussed plus beta I beta C so relationship between Tefl's constant it is something like this. The other technique is to get this so RP can be obtained by applying current small current in a galvanostatic polarization or you know potential static polarization method over a small current and there are instruments available this is a commercial instruments are available to find out the corrosion current density even in situ although their reliability one has to see how good they are there are several question related to this but that is not a part of our discussion right now only I wanted to mention that corrosion rate can be found out by linear polarization technique where you have small over potential in a new way or new C within plus minus 20 millivolt and this new C slope of the line Tefl's line in this zone in the zone where new a new C do not exit 20 millivolt that line gives us RP slope of that line gives RP and I core is B over RP B is stun gear constant given by this formula but this RP also I can find out from AC impedance spectroscopy I can if you know and in this one the electrical double layer or the interface of the bar and the surrounding is modeled as a capacitance and the polarization resistance. So when you apply current the polarization resistance you are applying all DC current by the way here all direct current. So when you apply an alternating current the capacitance because there are two material there is an interface it will have a capacitance it can store the charge and release the charge. So this is got a capacitance so RC is the concrete resistance so if this is my you know this is my reinforcement bar and this is my concrete surrounding the RC is here RC and at the interface I will have RP as well as capacitance. So these are parallel so I have got actually RP and parallel to this is the capacitance of the interface and this is the equivalent circuit simplest of the equivalent circuit assume. So when we apply an AC current through this when we apply an alternating current through this and we vary the frequency from this very expression of frequency so you can make two kind of plots one it called Neckwist plot another is called Bodez plot and from those plot again you can find out RP you can find out RP and then Icore is B divided by RP. So corrosion current density can be also found out from AC impedance spectroscopy as we call it but I do not have time to discuss them really in details. Well there are several other methods for corrosion rate measurement in C2 electrochemical method, cholesthetic method there are several there you know electrochemical noise method there are a n number of them but most popular is the standard Gary method LPR method and next is this that is why I say. But if you look at mass loss grabing matrically that is how much mass losses occur the mass loss will be proportional to I the current time atom equate Z and F you know from Faraday's clause that is why and if I divide I by area corrosion density then are the corrosion current density per unit area. So R will be the rate per unit area so it will be the kind of mass per unit depth that is going in. So this can be shown to be R can be related to actually it can be related to the by dividing by density in micrometer per year in terms of 3.27 atom equate of the material Z is a Z is a number of electron transfer involved. So in case of FE this will be 56 this will be 2 this value will be 28 and one can find out if you measure the corrosion current density density of the material in case of steel is 7.85 and therefore one can actually find out how much is the penetration depth per micron per year or it is also written in 10 to the power minus 6 inch per year mills per year and so on. So these are how we express. Now anodic polarization I is talking about you apply current from outside you apply current from outside through a potential trutic circuit and to this you know this you apply current through auxiliary electrode and this is the reference electrode and change the measure the potential change in the reference electrode and that is what you use in even an LPR method but you have other x lot of other arrangements, guard ring etcetera etcetera to do take care of certain special thing. So if you are doing a polarization over a wide range over a long range of potential it is actually a kind of a semi destructive or destructive test while LPR measurement we do over a small range of potential anodic polarization curve that I showed earlier to identify the zones of corrosion we do over a large range of potential and you get this kind of curves you know potential curves for example you might get this sort of anodic polarization curve cathodic polarization curve in this manner and you can actually find out where this is your equilibrium potential this could be your equilibrium potential. So it is in a rated concrete it is here it is in submerged water concrete this kind of behavior. So one can study the behavior and as the potential changes how to behave. So if corrosion rate is increasing some cases it might get dissipated that means it oxides are formed and then it stops but at a very high potential actually that might get broken down and so on so forth. So behavior of the electrode can be studied by kinetic behavior of the electrode can be studied by anodic polarization curve one of them I showed earlier and it can be studied by you know potential aesthetic studies. Let us see the effect of corrosion general corrosion there are two types of corrosion pitting pitting corrosion and general corrosion. Pitting occurs if the chloride is coming from outside if chloride is coming from outside chloride ingress chloride from outside from outside. Now in pitting the mass loss is very severe in pitting mass loss is very severe rebar losses rebar you know it loses is dimension like this. As I showed earlier in one of the slides in the previous lecture there is a kind of mass loss would be occurring here. So lot of mass loss that is pitting. So if the chloride is coming from outside anodic localized then it is pitting. So pitting is local this is local loss and the dimension change will be very very high but other cases general corrosion so general corrosion general corrosion general corrosion mass loss is not very high but what happens is there is a material you know the corrosion product particularly of this product red rust FeO OH H2O you know let me write it here again FeO OH H2O in other words which you can write as FeO H3 is red rust. This occupies volume much larger high volume high volume higher volume then Fe. So what happens is it occupies a large volume and therefore it exerts pressure to the surrounding concrete exert pressure first it fills in this pores exert pressure to the surrounding concrete and finally cause cracking of the cover concrete. So general corrosion results in cracking of the cover concrete and this can happen from carbonation or chloride coming from inside ingredients but for external chloride sometime you may have pitting corrosion if one place the chloride has gone other place it has not gone that location pit formation will be there and actually totally rebar may be lost totally. This could be very dangerous in pre stress concrete because if the pre stressing while lose you know lost is dimension it is under stress it may be even causing a brittle kind of failure. So typically you can see this general corrosion it causes first cracking in a beam loss of mass in case of slab internal crack sagging and loss of mass and this is what practically we can see in many cases the slab general corrosion it is gone from internal chloride this is a case from internal chloride whole steel is gone this is another case in case of a staircase already repaired by doing some gunniting again crack because of the corrosion inside this is of course a beam gone fully this is the sun shade gone completely. So there are several cases one would find how do I protect? Quality of concrete in cover concrete elastic modulus tensile strength and adequate cover depth are primarily required for you know corrosion protection but moisture is one thing which you should keep out. So good water proofing good water proofing use of blended cement improve the protection because blended cement exhibit better resistivity of concrete. Sometimes the improved protection even though deep precipitation time may not increase I mean may not increase in for carbonation but still overall it might provide better kind of protection use of corrosion resistance rebar like you know rebar with alloyed such as copper chromium etcetera in small part percentage they you know like there are corrosion resistance rebar then coating of the surface statement of concrete coating of rebar like epoxy coated epoxy coated bars epoxy coated fusion bonded fusion bonded epoxy coated bars corrosion inhibitor like sodium nitrite molyb date acrylic corrosion inhibitors there are varieties of inhibitors which are available but these are to be yet to be proven you know there are many things at yet to be proven but you can have something called cathodic protection where you apply current from outside to oppose the corrosion current that could be impressed current system or impressed current impressed current or sacrificial anode this is used in ship ship metallic ship. So you put aluminum which is actually anodic compared to steel and therefore aluminum will actually and it is cheaper it's cheaper waste aluminum or whatever you can use I mean it is cost process has such so aluminum will be lost but it will protect the steel so that is called sacrificial anode if you are applying some current from outside through batteries some cases of bridges reinforcement bar it has been done actually so it is such that it actually change the potential to such a level that it is immune potential or in others you are applying current in that case cathodic protection you know cathodic these are cathodic protection so it is impressed current system coating of river I said coating or surface treatment but these material these are all costly process. So just to conclude our discussion resistivity of blended cement I was talking about you see these are this is a diagram showing for OPC Portland Pozlina cement and postent slag cement this is kind of a relative resistivity and you can see the least are for OPC you know these are for OPC next one is for for different water cement ratio or for edmixed chloride so when you have added chloride from outside right and you have actually these ones are for other cement for different water cement ratios for you know situations like this so blended cement actually shows exhibits so these are for blended cement for three water cement ratios for this is for at 0 percent chloride this is for OPC 0.45 0.50 and 0.55 this is for PPC 0.45 0.50 0.55 slag cement 0.45 0.50 0.55 no chloride but if you have high chloride resistances this does not did not change much this did not change much but this is relative resistance change was there in PPC and PPC. So you can see this is against chloride this blended cement performs much much better well carbonation of course initial phases it may not be same but resistivity still is better even in case of carbonation also because resistivity is independent of whether it is carbonated concrete or uncarbated concrete. So resist is the kinetics is controlled by resistivity because we talked of how polarization also. So this finishes our discussion we can summarize we actually discussed about potential and from in the potential we talked about you know we talked about NERN's equation equation, 4 big diagram etcetera. Then we talked about NERN's equation and NERN's equation the Thphal's equation and then we talked about effect of effect of corrosion we talked of effect of corrosion we identified general corrosion and pitting corrosion. So general corrosion general corrosion and pitting this is only with respect to reinforcement corrosion. There are many other corrosion when it comes to steel as such you know like crevice corrosion stress corrosion cracking and so on so forth but in reference to corrosion this is comes with chloride external chloride this is generally for internal chloride internal flow rate N carbonation carbonation and then we talked about protection measures good concrete is the first thing I think I must have mentioned this but I am rementioning it before stopping rementioning it before stopping quality concrete and cover concrete elastic modulus is important good quality concrete is very important elastic modulus because it is related to cracking we will look at the next class tensile strength and educate cover depth these are very important. So good concrete is very important good concrete is very very important and elastic modulus of the concrete that is strength of the concrete and cover depth is very very important actually quality of construction place a big road. So I think with this we will finish off we will look at the corrosion a little bit in the next class and then we will look at the general strategy general strategy for durability of concrete in the last lecture of this module. Thank you. === Lecture 33 Transcript === Welcome to module 8 lecture 5. This is the last lecture of this module and we will continue with durability of concrete. In this last lecture we will look at general strategy of course some issues related to rebar corrosion would surely be looking into. So, first we look into some of the empirical models which are available for corrosion and then role of concrete and concrete quality and durability, general strategy of achieving durable concrete. So, in case of corrosion the propagation period we talked of in the service life we talked of if you recall we talked of service life there are two phase the simplest model there is a depassivation or initiation phase followed by a propagation period. So, today we are talking of this you know this is related to carbonation and all that. So, we are now looking at propagation period which actually is governed by the rate of corrosion of course, which is function of environment etcetera which you have seen earlier. So, some fundamentals we did look earlier, but the result of corrosion could be loss of steel cross section in some cases. I said especially in the case of pitting you know in case of pitting it is loss of steel cross section. A second case could be delamination of the rebar that is this is your enforcement bar and the surrounding concrete is here surrounding concrete is here surrounding concrete is here. Now, that is a this is the bottom side and there is a delamination from the rebar. So, this actually gets separated out bar gets separated out at the you know bond is lost and it digers delaminated. So, that could be a second sort of scenario and the third scenario is cracking of cover concrete. So, this is this is most concrete you know is quite common although delamination occurs in case of slab there could be cracks of this form as we have seen earlier cracks of this form and then there could be delamination of the cover if this is the cover this is the cover and this you know might fall off completely. So, so this could be three different cases and let us see what are the empirical model some empirical model available for this. So, case A loss of steel cross section in that case the this is the rate this is rate actually and this is the maximum cross section loss allowed you know delta R max is the maximum loss of cross section allowed loss of cross section allowed right cross section cross section allowed loss of cross section allowed because after that what will happen the if the material is lost significantly if the material is lost significantly then it might not be able to carry the load. So, maximum loss allowed is it will be related to maximum loss allowed. So, rate of propagation here is a maximum permissible loss of cross section. So, if I know rate in some manner and maximum loss then it is possible, but then rate must be expressed in terms of depth of penetration which I said 3.27 etcetera etcetera a formula which we looked into the last class all right. So, this is one way case B is case B was related to delamination and in this the delamination the rate can be related to CT into R 0. In fact, this is empirical so it can be this rate can be found out from any this rate can be found out for any case all of the three cases and CT is a factor for temperature we will look into this what are the values of CT R 0 is you can say reference corrosion rate. So, at standard temperature and at any other temperature this will be given by R and this is the time of corrosion would be 80 C by DR where D is the bar diameter and C is the covered depth. So, it is delamination it is delamination time right and that is 80 C by DR where C is the covered depth D is the bar diameter. So, it is proportional to C by D R is the rate of corrosion and same earlier also we had rate of corrosion. So, it is rate of corrosion is same expressed in terms of depth of penetration. So, these are actually this if you see this is this is covered by bar diameter and this is rate of again millimeter or mills per year I mean it will be micrometer per year or whatever it is. So, T C you will get in terms of time T C of course you will get in time. So, 80 D is an empirical equation. So, C is the covered depth G is the bar diameter CT is the temperature coefficient and this is valid for all three models that the empirical those people who have derived they have given this table for CT R 0 is rate of corrosion at 20 degree centigrade and again given in a table. So, therefore, for the kind of condition where actually experiments were done where this empirical model is applicable you know there you can use this formally and first find out the R 0 which is given for the table given in the table. Then if there is a temperature change rate you can determine from this and T C is the time for delamination given by this model. This is from this available in a book by Sardja and Vasekary durability design of concrete durability design of concrete. So, 20 degree tables I have just reproduced some of the part of the table is given if depending upon the relative humidity high humidity this value is low in carbonated concrete in chloride concrete. So, R value R 0 value for chloride concrete and carbonated concrete. Now, this is is a relative humidity this is 85 this value is fairly high in micrometer per year when relative humidity is 95 percent. It is carbonation has already occurred carbonated concrete this is the guidelines given for you know the corrosion. Now, you see if the relative humidity becomes very low corrosion rate becomes small because corrosion requires presence of moisture as well. But while in chloride still this continues and maximum is again around 95 percent relative humidity. So, 34 100 percent relative humidity within the concrete pore or in the condition that has been considered it actually reduces down. So, with the relative humidity R 0 values can be obtained at 20 degree centigrade and CT values one can obtain CT values one can obtain for different locations they have given. For example, northern field red fin length very cold very cold. So, they have given CT coefficient 0.21 because it will be less than 20 degree centigrade and Madrid which is close to 20 degree Amsterdam there this is 3 and Amsterdam 12. So, the temperature where it is depending upon the temperature these values are changing in case of sheltered or in case of exposed to rain. See sheltered from rain this is the scenario exposed rain. So, these are empirical relationship, but it gives you a kind of guideline or understanding sort of you know what we understand from this is there could be 3 cases possible one is delimination another is you know loss of the diameter and third is cracking of the cover concrete the 3 situation possible and all are dependent on R rate of corrosion which again is a function of temperature and function of temperature and also chloride or carbonated concrete relative humidity. So, it varies with all that and varies you know varies whether it is exposed to rain or sheltered from rain and CT values are given here. So, this is a function of temperature. So, case C then the last one the cracking of cover concrete this is given as D minus D mean divided by 2 R T C is D R max that is we have seen earlier. Now, D is the bad diameter and average corrosion rate for both crack than uncraved concrete. So, this is for uncraved concrete this for crack concrete D minus D minimum right divided by 2 R where average corrosion rate for both crack and then R uncraved concrete. So, T C this is given right for different relative humidity carbonated concrete the you know this relative humidity carbonated concrete this rates are given this is less than 2 and D is the bad diameter actually the minimum D that is likely to be there because R max is known. So, this divided by 2 R that would give you the time required for cracking of the cover concrete. So, this these these three empirical equations are given. But let us understand average corrosion rate both cracked and uncraved concrete for relatively chloride contaminated concrete this values are given average corrosion rate. So, this is also given this is also given in terms of average corrosion rate in carbonated concrete sorry this is for this is for chloride this for carbonated situation average corrosion rate is given here average corrosion rate is given here and time is given by this formula where R you can determine from this for carbonated concrete for 2 cases it is shown for other cases this values are available. So, some guidelines actually it gives you right and this is in the chloride situation average corrosion rates are given for different relative humidity to be used in this formula for cracking crack concrete the can concrete which is already cracked concrete which is already cracked right. Now, basically cracking of cover concrete is an important issue and it can be model earlier it was model considering thick and thin cylinder situation or by FEM modeling currently people are trying the properties which are important is modulus of elasticity cover depth tensile strength but diameter C by D ratio rate of corrosion in terms of penetration and density of thrust. So, all these properties are required if you want to predict the time of cover concrete cracking that is much relatively more sophisticated than what we just talked about. These were empirical models while this what I am talking of right now is empirical but based on theoretical elasticity mechanical model of cracking of the cover concrete. So, if you want to estimate cracking this is how one can model them. Now, the phenomena is looked up on like this this is your concrete and this is the rebar. So, the corrosion has occurred here the corrosion has occurred here the corrosion has occurred here red colored shows corrosion product has formed now this will exert a kind of pressure. So, this kind of exert a kind of pressure. So, those people who use cylinder theories they assume this is your cylinder. But otherwise continuum you can consider and the pressure that will be exerted outside that will cause excess strain strain in the zone strain as well as stresses in the zone and one can solve the problem of elasticity and find out the time work of cracking of cover concrete. But lot of work needs to be done here there are been attempt verification of the models by experimental work is not easy but thick cylinder could be assumed to be like this thick cylinder scenario large and thin cylinder you know is with this the pressure is from inside. So, the pressure is from inside there is a pressure. So, you can consider this thickness being very small if you think cylinder consideration apply those models. But one can actually do finite element modelling for the complete and then arrive at time. But there has been lot of uncertainties involved in such modelling material properties the how much what is the kind of you know interfacial properties of the interface the porosity in the interface between the steel bar and the concrete because some rust product will go and get accumulated there. So, pressure may not increase also the properties of the rust product they are modulus of elasticity and several other situation whether you take it as a you know what kind of problem you take it plane strain problem and then you take the uniform pressure bearing pressure becomes very difficult. So, you take uniform pressure in the surrounding system or take uniform strain in the you know deformation. So, all these are there are complexities involved in this modelling, but this is how one can visualize this at what happens and this can result in you know the cover taking of cover concrete which is defined as a service like. So, these are the further more sophisticated theoretical modelling at the moment even those empirical models that I talked about earlier would be applicable to only those specific conditions. But this gives us some understanding at least that one what factors does this propagation period depends. So, what we see right now is a propagation period will actually depend on the environment relative humidity, chloride contaminated concrete or carbonated concrete. So, you know chloride concrete or carbonated concrete and what is more important loss of bad diameter or cracking of the cover concrete whether the concrete is already cracked them situation will be different. So, all these factors that we have understood from our last couple of slides or last you know discussion that has gone. So, this I think we can close our discussion and propagation model can look into strategy for durability and that is what we will look into. Now, strategy for durability that has been so, we have understood you know all the problems deterioration process and their details in last four lectures and the part of this lectures as well. So, what is the strategy currently what we have understood is our understanding in terms of the physical the phenomena and physical you know models for deterioration is really limited very very limited possibly carbonation is a function of under root time t time this is experimentally validated. Many things should not have been experimentally validated many things should experimentally you know could not be experimentally validated because of the long term required accelerated test quite often may not actually represents the real situations. So, but we have to have strategy for durability and we had already in place over the years which is improving good lot of it is actually right now prescriptive. So, we will look into the prescriptive situation of IS code, but let us say let us see what are the possible strategies and we have got to understand you know we got we have got an understanding of the difficulties associated with doing mathematically or quantitatively estimating the service life of concrete because it is dependent on so many factors environment the materials etcetera and also our lack of understanding in a complex material like concrete which is not a single compound many compounds how it will react which compound will react under what situation all these complexities are there. Therefore, at the moment prediction of service life is practically not even in nested stage I will say it is in embryo stage because your mathematical understanding is relatively very very limited. So, we cannot you know stoichiometry of the reaction and the product formation and the mechanics of till it cracks or something of that kind that is really at is you know in less than infancy stage embryo stage if I may put in. So, but do search are on little improve, but at the moment you got to have some strategy. So, therefore, let us look at the strategy durable concrete exhibits desired performance in exposure during service that is what we said in the beginning durable concrete must exhibit desired performance in exposure during service and all the deterioration process that we have discussed actually we have seen that they involve ingress of water or oxygen or carbon dioxide or chloride or something agent causing degradation. So, therefore, since we cannot address specific degradation phenomena what people have done earlier permeability has been considered. You know this idea is actually borrowed from the soil because permeability of the soil is well you know it is an its application has been well established, but one difference with the soil and the concrete would be you know permeability governs the flow through the soil. Now, flow through the soil could be quite often when we are dealing with a geotechnical problem or otherwise or trying to look at their permeability you know it is quite often it could be saturated situation many many a time it will be saturated situation. So, therefore, this idea was already available for the soil this was borrowed here, but for concrete concrete remains most of the time unsaturated is you know saturated concrete is only is a rare thing it is not very often when we are looking because our concrete would be exposed to atmosphere many other cases to wetting and drying plus zone of you know marine environment wave will come and heat. So, this is this one may not be able to assume it fully saturated all the time in all the places. So, but however, since the tool was already concept was already available in soil that was borrowed from the soil early on because permeability is the property through which governs the flow of fluid or gases through this made through porous material. So, this is the measure permeable to the measure of ease with which liquid or gases can travel through the concrete and is used as a qualitative measure of durability has been used and still use as a qualitative measure of durability I said qualitative because you cannot it cannot give you any quantitative information with regards to concrete service life or anything, but you can relatively compare relatively compare to concrete more permeable concrete is less durable than a less permeable concrete. But there are other issues will come to them soon. So, rate of flow per unit area under steady state condition is defined as the you know is defined as the rate of flow under steady state condition is defined as the it is for unit hydraulic gradient we call it permeability. So, k is the this should be small d this should be small d d d x you know this is d h d x d h d x is a hydraulic gradient. So, the flow takes place because there is a hydraulic gradient existing that means, if this is my specimen there is a head here delta h is a head here you know delta h is a here or d h is a head and this is the x thickness. So, if I maintain if it is saturated and this d h d x is constant under this the flow through this one q will is proportional to d h d x like any other flow heat flow and similar equations. This is Darcy's equation q is equals to k d h d x and this is coefficient of permeability. So, permeability is defined as that property which governs basically flow it is something analogic to thermal conductivity or conductivity of you know conductivity thermal conductivity to a similar one. So, basically or diffusion coefficient that we talked talked about in case of steady condition. So, this is coefficient of permeability therefore, for a given hydraulic gradient flow is proportional to k. So, more k means more flow less k means less flow. Now, it has been observed that k is a function of capillary porosity. So, as your capillary porosity this is about 30 percent, 20 percent, this is about 30 percent, 20 percent, 20 percent, 20 percent, 10 percent and this is coefficient of permeability 10 view of minus 12 13 you know large value 10 view of minus 12 or so. So, this if the capillary porosity increases suddenly there is a population threshold above which it increases significantly below this this values are small suddenly from this point it starts increasing. Now, why such a thing happen? Well, when the capillary porosity is large I mean the inter connectivity pores of pores are important, but anyway before I come to this therefore, since capillary it is related to capillary porosity in this manner it should be related to water cement ratio in this manner as well. So, in the water cement ratio this is water to cement ratio 0.5 here 0.6 here 0.4 here and it increases suddenly it increases. So, it is a function of water cement ratio as the water cement ratio increases beyond 0.5 suddenly it starts increasing exponentially increases. The reason being basically earlier you know capillary porosity being if it is high supposing this is my material and these are my capillary pores are here. Now, if I have low porosity there will be isolated when the porosities are high they are likely to be all interconnected. So, flow through interconnected system is likely to be more. So, there will be interconnected at high porosity at high porosity high porosity capillary porosity oblique water cement ratio pores becomes interconnected pores are interconnected interconnected. So, therefore, their permeability increases. So, there is a percolation threshold something like 0.5 after which all pores tends to be interconnected connected and there is a tendency for permeability to increase. So, you can see the porosity and inter connectivity of those pores this is an important issue as regard to permeability. It reduces with the age as your age in days reduces permeability coefficient of permeability reduces here 10 to the power minus 6 log scale this plotted in log scale, but with higher the you know it reduces so 10 to the power minus 12. So, it is 10 to the power minus 6 so all it goes to 10 to the power minus 12 in meter per second. So, with age it reduces and we can understand hydration will progress, capillaries will get segmented you know capillaries which are interconnected. So, this is our if you recall this is our this is our cement particle this is our cement particle and this is the hydrated cement this is the hydrated cement around hydrated cement and if you more hydrated cement around and this was the water originally this was the water originally this was the water field space as the hydration progresses as the hydration progresses this would go and reach their capillary will get segmented and we talked of capillary segmentation earlier therefore, interconnectivity will get reduced. So, this is related to more hydration capillary gets first total capillary will reduce and segmentation will increase they will be less interconnected therefore, you know permeability tends to reduce. So, what we have seen so far permeability is a function of porosity water cement ratio obviously capillary porosity and with age it reduces it is also function of age because of the segmentation. With this we can understand from this diagram for example, consider this one this is the pores are all interconnected pores are all interconnected pores are all interconnected through this ones they are all interconnected through this ones interconnected through this one these are interconnected you know capillary pores are all interconnected these are your capillary pores they are interconnected. So, this if I have low porosity system you know that is low permeability system there this can disconnected there is no interconnection between these two now this interconnections are lost. So, therefore, this will be a low permeability system compared to this one this one which is a high permeability system. So, compared to this one this is high permeability system this will be low permeability system this will be a low permeability system. So, this is low permeability system so, you can see capillary is there the segmented capillary is an uns segmented capillary therefore, the curing must also play a role because if you do not do the curing capillary will not be segmented I mentioned this when we are talking of curing. So, capillary will not be segmented if we do not do the you know minimum curing has to be done related to capillary segmentation. So, this gives us certain understanding related to permeability. So, what we have seen so far? We have seen that you know the permeability depends upon porosity pore sizes shape interconnectivity and this all governs the ingress of fluid through the concrete all right. So, if we want to control the permeability we will have to actually look into this issues. Now porosity and pore properties are directly related to water cement ratio that is what also you have seen and curing also plays an important role because it causes segmentation. So, therefore, we control water cement ratio and curing these are very important issues with regard to strategy for durability all right. So, interconnectivity also relates is also related to curing that is segmentation. So, let us see something more related to this permeability well a mathematical relationship of can be of this kind for permeability related to pore sizes. My idea is to give you show you what are the kind of properties of the you know system that will govern the permeability of let us estimate paste system. Now, in this one case transport permeability, case transport permeability here case transport permeability right case transport permeability rho is the you know this equation is theoretically derived based on results of intrusion porosimetry whereby inter connected force one can determine and porosities. So, depends upon density of water this is acceleration due to gravity P is the porosity P is the porosity this is what is called mean distribution radius or median pore M is a factor exponent which is 2.674 OPC paste might vary from material to material and D is the dispersion of the pores that is if I plot log of if I plot you know pore size distribution volume of pores let us say and if I plot log of pore size then I will get this sort of a relationship. So, this dispersion of pore the minimum size to the maximum size minimum to maximum size maximum size of pore. So, that the go what D is related to that. So, D is related to dispersion of pores D is related to pore dispersion right. So, this is mean distribution radius D is related to pore dispersion rho is density of water this is dispersion as I said this is dispersion and this is j going from 1 to n that means, there are several pore sizes which you can divide into number of groups say n groups number of desire you know number of groups n groups you can divide you can divide them into n groups and each group delta l n r gives you thus you know small d r values or you know r 1 r 2 minus r 1. So, in log terms so l n r 2 minus l n r 1 that is delta l n r M is the exponent I already said D is the dispersion R j is the jth pore size average jth pore and this is for any pore size. So, R j stands for jth pore size. So, AC stands for aspect ratio of the pore which you can take it depending upon type of pore shape of the pore. For example, aspect ratio if it is very you know cylindrical would be 1 because pore size will be circular cross section of the pore. So, it is aspect ratio of the cross section of the pore. For electric elliptic pores this will depend upon the major axis minor axis of the ellipse. This is tortuosity of the pores. So, this can be determined for some of the material some are available, but I am not interested in how to determine a estimate k from all this factor right now. Mu is the viscosity of water. Now, this can be determined from powers model as we have seen earlier. R 0.5 and D we said that it can be because you know porosity can be related to this can be also related to water cement ratio. This can also be related to water cement ratio right and particle size of the cement particle particle size of the cement particle water cement ratio H degree of hydration that is H all this D and R 0.5 can be related to those and we have shown some relationship earlier when we are talking of strength, but one can relate to this. So, in nutshell what we see we see that k depends upon pore size distribution as many number of size you have k will vary according to that. So, also depends upon dispersion of this pores and mean radius. Now, all this and p itself depends on water cement ratio average particle size of cement or particle size distribution of the cement even maybe and H. Then it depends upon total city which also can be related to you know the material the kind of H etcetera, viscosity of water and so on and so forth and aspect ratio of pores which in the simplest k it can be one for circle. So, these are the factors on which permeability is depends on them, but you see experimental determination of steady state permeability is difficult and time consuming. In fact, unsteady state it will vary with the degree of saturation. So, k in unseater state can be a function of theta where theta is degree of saturation degree of saturation or relative moisture content relative moisture content moisture content. So, this will but then k generally we determine for you know we determine for saturated condition. So, to achieve the saturated condition steady state situation it takes very long time in concrete because permeability is very very low. So, it is difficult and time consuming very long time it takes and it is not easy to do. So, this is one thing second aspect with permeability is permeability cannot be used for modeling moisture profile or you know amount of carbon dioxide that will penetrate or oxygen that will penetrate. So, oxygen permeability or carbon dioxide permeability they are all related to saturated condition. In fact, unseated situation will be more you know it is easily easy to model through diffusivity. So, diffusion properties are diffusivity although they are not necessarily diffusion as we understood from fixed law that is concentration dependent diffusion, but they are you know sorry concentration the diffusion which you know is a function the because of a concentration gradient, but here the diffusion of oxygen carbon dioxide all this they will be concentration dependent, but water diffusion or hydraulic diffusivity it is you know it is not exactly diffusion, but it flows under capillary suction or under vapor pressure gradient. So, for water situation hydraulic diffusivity one can use and the equation that governs this liquid water flow or similar equation governs even vapor flow is called Richard's equation right. D theta is a function of the degree of saturation in itself this comes from extended Darcy's law. I am trying to tell you only the importance of this one here rather than permeability if you want to find out numerically modeling the flow or ingress into moisture ingress into material concrete. So, these hydraulic diffusivity theta is relative moisture content. So, you see diffusion properties are important similarly carbon dioxide you know this is diffusivity of this hydraulic diffusivity can be expressed in the similar manner for from pore size distribution using this equation all the things are same except that here this is the surface tension property this is surface tension property then this is this is surface tension properties of water and F1 relates to aspect ratio actually this relates to aspect ratio F1 is another property which is related you know is another related to a pore size distribution all right. DVDR is the rate of change of pore volume with radius and tortuosity viscosity r.5 rj etcetera porosity all this comes into picture m which was there in experiment that will come. So, in fact hydraulic diffusivity can be also expressed in the similar manner from pore size distribution beta is a contact angle of water which will be one for most of the cases cos beta will be one beta is 0. So, cos beta will be equals to 1. So, one can actually relate this properties to you know pore size distribution. Similarly, carbon dioxide diffusion and the modeling of carbon dioxide flow can be through diffusion properties for example, this is porosity this is the water field space or water content carbon dioxide concentration and diffusion of carbon dioxide diffusion coefficient this is the sink that is all alkali content related to the alkali content of the concrete. So, where P is the porosity W is the volumetric water content carbon dioxide is a carbon dioxide concentration this is the diffusion coefficient this is a sink term dealing with reaction of carbon dioxide with alkaline material in the concrete oxygen diffusion is also important. So, what we see if we want to actually model this flow or profile within the material how much carbon dioxide how does the carbon dioxide concentration varies with time and space within concrete then I got to solve this kind of equation and diffusion coefficient corresponding carbon dioxide diffusion coefficient to be important. We have seen the chloride diffusion equation generalize last sometime in third lecture you know for second or third or fourth lecture in fact third lecture we looked into in this one. So, what we see is the diffusion properties are important if you are trying to model them permeability can only give you qualitative information a better concrete and poor concrete, but there are lot of work to be done here research is to be done here in order that you know one can actually use them for practical purposes the equations the material properties solving them may not be a big problem with the kind of numerical methods and computers that is available today, but not easy to find out the coefficients in the coefficients in the equation. So, that is it similarly oxygen diffusion is important if you are trying to model let us say corrosion process, but corrosion there are much more complexity if one wants to model for rate of corrosion there will be so many equations involving so many diffusion process so many processes also charge balance will be there. So, these are the complication involved in modeling and predicting service life. However, we have we can compare and sometime we might have to charge judge performance of materials in situ. So, certain permeation properties and permeability measurement is difficult in situ it will be even more difficult. So, certain tests have been devised namely sorbitivity is a property initial surface absorption test sorbitivity for left specimen lab water displacement this can be done in situ fixed here and water permeability in situ as well as in the lab both then also lab also lab also lab lab water be as absorption test take a core specimen and do absorption test. Now, this all gives us what is called permeable vibration properties auto clamp and there are many more there are there are number of them you know series of them have been developed at different places like this is in Belfast this is BS absorption test this is also BS test sorbitivity originally by hall and etcetera. So, there are several other properties there is one in the Switzerland some modification of this one modification of this one because this requires wake home application. So, without the wake home application so, there are several of them which are there and they some of them can be used in situ not on the lab specimen so that you can find out the performance of durability performance of concrete in structure. So, permeability is difficult to determine but this ones will be relatively easier but with this one you can actually compare two different concrete but cannot predict really much not you know they are not predictive but you can tell you about which is better concrete which is poor concrete. Anyway, this is the situation but one more important issue is for durability cover concrete is most important because ingress takes place through surface. So, permeability or permeation property of the cover concrete is important and all in situ measurement of course, looks into the cover measurement in cover because that is what is approachable but you see the stresses are maximum stresses are maximum at the surface and rivers are placed also below the cover. So, cover importance of cover concrete is very very important cover concrete is generally poor quality due to bleeding wall effect etcetera etcetera. Let us look at this cover concrete you see if this is your concrete this will be the zone of poor concrete why because wall effect packing of aggregates are not very good here wall effect remember wall effect wall effect and this could actually result in more porosity here. So, this concrete here is not very good water as a tendency to go up water as a tendency to go up. So, maximum water ratio maximum bleed bleeding would occur here even when you do vibration water as a tendency to come here water as a tendency to come here. So, therefore, this zone zone of poor concrete zone of poor concrete and water cement ratio maximum here minimum here cement will tendency cement comes down cement as a tendency cement as a tendency to come down water as a tendency to go up. So, C comes down H goes up maximum water cement ratio minimum water cement ratio. So, therefore, what will happen you know you will have poorest concrete right up there poorest concrete is right up there because maximum water cement ratio there will be evaporation shrinkage and all those effects. So, therefore, zone of good concrete is somewhere here zone of good concrete is somewhere here and zone of poor concrete is there and poorest concrete is there. But, this is the most stress areas these are the most stress areas because flexural stresses are maximum here depending upon of course, the kind of structure you have. Flexural compression is maximum here tensile is maximum here. So, tensile cracking will anyway occur torsion is maximum at the periphery stresses are maximum at the periphery and penetration do occur from outside penetration do occur from outside penetration do occur from outside. So, therefore, cover concrete is most important but that is poorest durability is governed by cover concrete. So, one must put in lot more effort on the cover concrete all right. So, good concrete is only in the core. So, in glasses takes place through the cover concrete stress and stress are maximum at the cover concrete and cracking also first takes place at the cover concrete even if it takes place inside does not matter. But, when it comes to the surface it would actually cause more penetration of more harmful ingredients and therefore, durability problem will be enhanced further. So, near surface this is what governs the cover governs the durability is there a way? Well, there is possibly some way but at the moment you know this is inherent in concrete. So, you may have to keep water cement ratio somewhat higher put over lay may be we will see that of course, tensile strength and elastic modulus of cover concrete is important because this governs cracking this governs strains from the stresses that is applied. Permutation quality at the surface this is most important and both are controlled by poverty of cover property of porosity of cover concrete and through water cement ratio of cover concrete. But, we have no way to really cover control the water cement ratio of cover concrete just like that. There is something which you can do I will just come to that but we can actually do what? We can improve the cover concrete by over less put a thick layer you know this is your concrete let us say this is your concrete this is your original concrete put a cover layer put a layer put a layer here. So, that is over lay coating put a coating here put a coating here put just a coating coating coating. For blocking treatment by you know for blocking treatment or for liners actually water proofing treatment is I might have and water proofing admixtures into the concrete. Also, I can putting some material which I can brush application I can do here I can do brush application onto the concrete surface I can do brush application onto the concrete surface and this material penetrates inside some of them reacts with substrate some of them reacts with the substrate to block the pore some might act in the you know at the boundary of the capillary react and just get adsorb there reactor get adsorb there and in the process they change the contact angle of water inside. Since most of the ingress is through water it will not allow water to come in. So, this pore liners pore blocking treatment these are actually water proofing treatment and if water do not go in then obviously durability will be enhanced. So, cover concrete can be improved by this sort of situation but then at the moment of course, we do talking terms of water cement ratio and cement control but some of them could be costly for example, overall this could be costly coating could be because you may have to repeat them over period of time as we have seen earlier that you may have to you know there is a service life for this one also and you may have to you know go on changing them from time to time. So, therefore, if you change them from time to time there is a recurring cost involved life cycle cost will increase. So, these are these could be there but then one way is to use a control permeability form liner this is actually a material something like this you know this let us say this this is a material it has got it is a pore liner it is essentially a thick thin material thin material put in on to the form work this is a thin material this is a form work this is a form this is a form form or let me write you would like do this form form work on that I put a liner on that I put a liner I put a liner thin liner now this liner is a porous material it it is a porous material the porosity of course, varies porosity varies. So, it has it has got a filtering effect and then then there is a drainage so, inner side it allows water to come in but no solids no cement particle can enter here and its backside it has got a kind of a drainage it can allow the water to come in and water can drainage drain below down below. So, when you are vibrating the water tends to move this side air tends to move this side so, it will actually take out the air and water and allow it to drain out. So, there is a first phase you know first phase first is it is a thin material it is a thin material thin material it has got two layers actually front layer this is a filter layer so, it is a filter say polymeric composite material filter and back layer is actually back layer is a porous layer porous layer. So, it has got the function to drain function of drainage this is got a function of filtering. So, A is here B is here so, cement particle or you know this material material moves along this direction cement water etc etc water moves along this direction, but cement particles are blocked here so, water moves along this direction comes here and gets drained down. So, result is low water cement ratio at the surface result is low water cement ratio at the low result is low water cement ratio at the surface result is low water cement ratio at the serp way. So, you see this a lining material this is the lining material. So, when you vibrate this is the lining material this is your form why this is the lining material and water and air will have a tendency to move water and air will have a tendency to move water and air will have a tendency to move to move you know towards the outer periphery and when you have this material what happens is water cement ratio here reduces significantly. So, if your original water cement ratio was somewhere around 0.7 without the liner with liner it might go even to 0.4 where here it is 0.5 these are reinforcement bar. So, reinforcement bar is here reinforcement bar is here without the liner water cement ratio is very like this with liner water cement ratio might vary like this with liner water cement ratio might vary like this with liner water cement ratio might vary in this manner water with liner it can vary like this. So, therefore, what you see is lower water cement ratio is the cover grid denser cover grid but and no bug holes it gives you a fantastic finish. But, unfortunately is extremely costly is very costly is and has not been popular at all because of its cost and also application difficulty because you have to put it over the form work apply it over the form work and you know fix it over the using a tape and since it is you know like by reducing I mean you cannot demonstrate quantitatively how much will be the advantage at the moment other than qualitative advantage. So, this kind of system might work later on or come may be develop later on but at the moment is costly it is not really used as much. So, this is what what we have seen you know how you can control the duration. === Lecture 34 Transcript === Welcome to module 9 lecture 1. Now, module 9 will look into special concrete. First one is of course, high strength concrete and in this lecture we will cover high strength concrete. So, what will be the outline of our discussion historical overview? Obviously, some definition what is high strength concrete etcetera and basically the various features on strength. How do you get that high strength? Water cement ratio and high range water reducing agent water their roles. What is the role of aggregates and we will discuss into properties. Page strength as high as 276 mpa was obtained in 1930. D Abraham in fact could obtain a strength as high as 276 mpa in 1930. He used a water cement ratio of 08 right. He used water cement ratio of 08. Applied pressure high pressure, applied high pressure high pressure and could get a strength of 276 mpa. So, you see it was it could even write in the beginning write in the very early age of the history of cement based material or concrete science. You know one could find out that the strength could be pretty high if you have packed it properly if you have actually applied high pressure and make it densified and if you densify it. So, if you look at historically if you look historical scenario maximum strength was 40 mpa let us say till about 1970 or let us say 45 mpa never more than 50 mpa in no case. But currently what we define? We define 60 mpa concrete I mean I am talking of cube strength I am talking of cube strength cube compressive strength which we have discussed so far cube compressive strength that is up to 60 mpa you know in the reference literature you will find cube strength up to 60 mpa 20 day strength up to 60 mpa that can be said as normal concrete. So, above 60 mpa that is actually high strength concrete HSC that is actually high strength concrete. Now, IS 456 IS 456 2000 and its later amendments actually as recognized M 60 to 80 mpa is high strength concrete M 60 to M 80 is high strength concrete. So, then therefore, of course, they are talking of the grade. So, grade is 60 mpa which means the strength is somewhere around 70 mpa perhaps 60 plus strength to about 80 plus strength would be high strength concrete. F 28 greater than 120 mpa will be called as very high strength concrete very high strength concrete. But many of the systems which actually tend to become cement beige material cement beige matrices C B M I will call it cement beige matrices because they you know some of the ingredients of concrete may not be there in some concrete for example, very high strength concrete system you may not have coarse aggregate. So, it is actually cement bed matrices or cement base composite or whatever you call it. So, that is the kind of definition we have today as far as high strength concrete is concerned. But then, there is something called high performance concrete you know the high performance concrete you define a set of performance for example, strength is one perfect you know strength is one compartment strengthen one performance strength is one performanceright strength is one performance But then we have come across various kind of performance is fresh state performance, fresh state performance. Harden long term long term long term performance, harden state performance there are so many performances so far we have talked about fresh state performance like flow ability. You know we also talked about a little bit of real or g workability you know whatever it is ease of compaction and so on whatever we define bleeding and then shrinkage we talked about creep we talked about some of them could be long term and hardening state property hydration generation of heat of hydration during the hydration you know hardening process heat of hydration early strength gain 28 day strength or hardened state strength actually long term durability creep shrinkage all these properties there could be several performances of concrete and many of them we have talked about so far. So high performance concrete actually deals with high performance concrete deals with a situation where a set of performance is specified performance requirement is specified and it must satisfy those requirements. For example if I have a low strength self compacting concrete this could be also termed as a high strength concrete high performance concrete not high strength concrete high performance concrete while it is not high strength but it could be high performance. So performances although most of the time you know high performance means strength is also a performance but supposing I have defined certain properties at a very high level I have specified at a given level and that would be performances. So high performance concrete and analogy could be looked into like limit state design or ultimate load design ultimate load design used to look at only at the load it must be safe against load and the load is taken that load design is taken for the ultimate load which it can carry as opposed to working stress design which was dealing with only the working stress situation. So ultimate load design looks at only strength at the ultimate stage defined one of the failure as a load failure against load but then limit state design looks into several limits several limits deflection you know serviceable little limits limits related to ultimate load and so on so forth so collapse and so on so forth. So therefore here high performance concrete is something analogy we are looking at many performances and I might define a set of performance. So strength could be one of the performance there could be other set of performance I defined and that should be satisfied by the concrete. So high strength concrete is more than high performance concrete is high strength concrete could be a high performance concrete but all high performance concrete need not be high strength it is not be all this journal it is actually. So that is what is high strength concrete and high performance concrete, that is what is high strength concrete and high performance concrete they are definition. I said that water cement ratio used was 0.08 by D. Abraham and he also found that strength is a function of strength is a function of strength is a function of you know water cement ratio in this manner it reduces. So therefore if I have low water cement ratio strength will increase and if you can pack it so well you can get very high strength. So therefore this was understanding during D. Abraham's work from D. Abraham's work right this was understanding from Abraham's work but then TC power and their team actually found out the porosity and they could link water cement ratio to porosity water cement ratio to porosity capillary porosity and this we have discussed and we have actually talked in the very first module itself. So porosity and lower the porosity better is a durability as well as strength is higher of hard and concrete. This is what we have seen through our discussion. So therefore the whole idea to get higher strength I must reduce porosity but then I also talked about if you recall porosity for the same porosity smaller porcises will give you higher strength. So reduction of the porosity and refinement of the porcises are important for high strength system. So if you want to get a high strength system then you must reduce down the porosity and you must also refine the porcises. Now all this idea that came through over the years that result in high performance concrete densified with small particle system will look at that macro defect free matrices reactive powder concrete. So these are results of this kind of early breakthrough would give into later understanding our later improvement you know by reducing down essentially porcises and porosity that is what it is. So we will look into all this high strength matrices later on now we will concentrate into high strength concrete etcetera. Now we said that if you want to get high strength concrete then you must refine the pore and you must reduce the porosity this is the main cracks of the matter and therefore how do you do it well you use a fine pozolonic material such as silica fume which you have discussed earlier which you have discussed earlier and you got to use low water cement ratio that is what the idea we said that water cement ratio must be lower and this lower water cement ratio means you should be able to use some sort of water reducing agent and obviously the aggregate size and other things packing must be appropriate. So basically you know aggregate size and packing that should be appropriate packing should be appropriate this is packing. Now just let me go a little bit historical we have looked into all the porcised material in the very cementitious material in the very first module you know one of the earlier module you have looked into this materials and also looked into their history little bit of their history also looked into. Now remember this is a little bit linked to other industry as well because this is a byproduct coming out from silicon industry or ferrocilicon industry that is what we have looked into in the beginning. Pozolonas are used for very very long time historically Pozolona were used 2000 or even more you know that kind of time historic times just after pre-historic maybe time from that time Roman Empire used the porzolonic material so they are the volcanic ashes then came I told you the lime and silica combinations were used various kind of various ways various part of the world including India where we use Turkey and so on so forth. Now this gave rise to cement but then material like fly ash became essentially from the environmental concern and reduction of the cement which was costly which is a costly material in the cement based system to reduce that as well as from the environmental concern fly ash has been used but fly ash is not as fine as this. So this was because thermal power plants came so you know like 50 60's thermal power plants came so 70's you used Pozolonic research on Pozolonic material like use of fly ash was there. Blast furnace slacks were now available therefore slacks cement were also there so those research continued but the electronics industry semiconductor industry started developing in 70's practically you know although the solid state electronics might have started from 1950's I mean the research of transistor and all that you know they started from 40's late 40's and 50's but the silicon as a material is important started possibly in 70's and 80's more so silicon industry or ferro silicon industry grew and that gave us the product like condensed micro silica or silica fume. So it is only 80's when this material became available and if you recall that this material is highly Pozolonic with a very fine size reaching silica that is what we discussed earlier. So this material is finer than cement and therefore the fine Pozolonic material that became available as in by product from some other industry which was you know which actually people started looking into its utility and that is how the high strain concrete could come in 1980's and 90's and later on of course. So therefore as a historic reason reason why did it come you know the other material is not even before that material is not perhaps known but not to the great extent that was there and it was available it was definitely limited. Today also it is not available everywhere for example in India we have to import it and it is costly however this is the material together with this material made it possible for high strain made it possible to produce high strain concrete alright because this material is finer than cement there are other roots tried to improve the strength of concrete namely polymer concrete we will choose we will discuss sometime later on polymer cement concrete which are well let access again we will discuss sometime later on but they were costly they are still costly root actually but this gave us a viable way after the pharaoh silicon industries development took place this gave us a material which could be used and this fine Pozolonic material silica fume now water cement ratio reduction so that that is that is one thing second issue is water cement ratio reduction now if you want to reduce water to cement or even water to cement issues there is a minimal required for standard consistency we talked of it earlier that at least you require water for standard consistency for the paste otherwise paste itself will be some add rise some a solid so it is not be simply water blue proper dispersion of the particle would not be there. So you could not have gone to a very low water cement ratio but for the construction chemical development now historically when you looked at the admixture you could remember historically Lignos alphanets came pretty early 1937 this we mentioned sometime earlier 1932 but the Malamayan and naphthalene formaldehyde condensates you know sulphinated Malamayan and naphthalene formaldehyde condensates they came in 1970s synthetic once and then polycarbos cellate ether came later on 80s and so on so forth you know with with the what you call hyper plasticizers or very high range ultra high range water reducing agent and so on so forth. So now this could actually disperse the cement or cementitious particle significantly and thereby increase or you know the water required for consistency could be reduced so low water cement ratio could be achieved only when you have high range water reducing agent otherwise you will apply high pressure to get that kind of strength like in the paste concrete of course it would be fairly difficult technologically may not be a viable situation so therefore low this to achieve this this played a big role now this is anyway required but this two things are the high range water reducing agent and the mineral admixtures now that brings up to the situation that actually 6 component rather than 4 components concrete 6 components rather than 4 in concrete 6 component concrete rather than 4 6 component rather than 4 in concrete. So basically earlier we are using cement water coarse aggregate fine aggregate 4 components 4 components that is very conventional very very old even modern engineered concrete of any strength should preferable be 6 component because the fifth and the 6 component will allow to reduce cement and get proper better property make it cheaper economical more sustainable. So modern concrete all should be 6 component but high strength concrete cannot be 4 component at all high strength concrete cannot be 4 component at all it has to be a 6 component rather than 4 component in you know concrete 4 component concrete. So the 6 component is 5th is this and 6th is this. 5th is this component 6th is this I mean could be any other material of the possibility should be you know possibly any other material but should be fine and should have also some kind of reactive scenario which can improve the porosity reduce the porosity and effect in porry fine when silica foam is able to do it some other material may come some other you know in future and which might be able to give it but at the moment it is silica foam which is very very which is for example people are trying processed ground granulated blast furnace slag or maybe processed metacol you know some other material which should but then whole idea is that it must be it must act should be able to go into the interstities of the cement system itself and also effect in some kind of additional bond formation in future not only just the filler effect because if it goes into the interstities of cement system itself it will act like a filler but if it is some kind of bond the filler would you know act much better. Now high range water reducing agent in addition to CWFA and CSA so these two more components so it is a 6 component concrete has to be as I said it is not only high strength concrete but any concrete modern engineered concrete should be 6 component why not even n component some more admixtures which will come in future and they will improve the properties in much better manner. So, a generalized system could be an component concrete with this 6 is definitely maybe 7 to 8 to improve properties in some other manner some other properties and so on so forth. So, you see this if you look at it the old concrete air entrained concrete is was this one you had this was the volume of air water and air entrained concrete was very common in the west in N.E.I. you may not have done air entrained but this will be still less void should be less takes actually this was the cement which was relatively less but then large quantity of water this is your fine aggregate and this quartz aggregate. And if you look at the high strength concrete this has got significantly reduced from here it has got significantly reduced here and you have cement plus supplementary cementitious material you know these are the relative volume air volume air volume we are reducing the void volume in the just hardened state you can think of water volume which is actually herodioed it would mean frequently reducing the system and cement and this is mineral add mixtures and then fine aggregate is this one offorth aggregate is or sorry quartz aggregate it is this is your quartz aggregate so fine aggregate. So, what you see actually this is now instead of this you have got the mineral add mixtures here. The water is reduced water is reduced water is reduced water is reduced this has This has become more, this has reduced, this fines will also increase, but this has also reduced, because this will be now, although they might occupy similar volume, but to accommodate this more volume of the paste, more volume of the, you know, this paste you need possibly more sand in the system, reduce on the larger aggregate that would have, you know, implications on interfacial transition zone as well as substring edge, we will discuss this sometime later on. So, 6 component concrete rather than 4, 6 component now, because to reduce this, you need a high range water reducing agent to make it, compaction possible, workable to the possible, workable concrete pumping possible and so on so forth, you need to have to reduce this, actually you need the 6 component. So, you can see that 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 plus the 6 component is a, what are reducing in this is a must and as I said there could be even more. So, that is what make is made it is point possible the high strength concrete, that is the, you know, that is what made it possible high strength concrete. So, this is what the reactions we have looked into, so typical C 3 S reaction would produce CH and this CH together with the silica fume will produce CHS gel. So, this is a secondary porgyposolonic reaction, this will be the case in high strength concrete 2 and this is essential, of course, in normal concrete you will have also if you add porgynonic material there. So, reduction in outer products with low water cement ratio, remember we talked of inner product and outer product, this is the original cement grain boundary, the hydrogen product inside this, we call it inner product and outside this will be outer product, but if you have low water cement ratio, outer product required will be low and filler effect with this fine material mineral, that means fine mineral will go, fine mineral will go inside this particle itself, fine mineral will go inside the cement particle itself, these are your cement particle. Let us say I have got fine minerals, which will go inside this, which will go inside this and they will also be porgynonic, so they react and you remember we talked about the you know hydrogen process of all different kind of mineral admixtures and so on, right in the first module itself, that is what you would make possible the high strength concrete. High range water reducing agent for defloculating and this will improve the ITZ porosity and lower the ITZ thickness also. I will come to this a little bit later more, how it actually reduces the ITZ thickness, I will just come to this in a while, right. So, presence of aggregate size, I will come to the ITZ reduction little bit later, now aggregate particle introduces stress concentration, that is what we know at the interface and volume region of stress around aggregate increases with aggregate size. So, basically you know the interface is very, very important that is what the weakest link and we have seen most of the time the crack starts from there, crack starts from there. So, therefore, it is important to improve the interfacial transition zone. So, aggregate particle larger the size actually it increases you know the more stress concentration will be there because surface area is less, large size means surface area is less. So, the same stress if it has to pass there will be more stress concentration and volume region of stress around aggregate will increase, right volume region of stress concentration. So, this the weakest areas, weakest volume will increase for higher strength concrete is stress concentration. So, this we have seen earlier when we are talking of strength for higher strength concrete stress concentration around aggregate discontinuity is there and lowering of bond area dominates therefore, we use lower MSA because bond area will be reduced same volume of aggregate let us say one with a larger size aggregate MSA being higher that means, your finer proportion will reduce total surface area of the aggregate will actually total surface area of the aggregate will increase you know total surface area of the aggregate will increase if you have a final material. So, if you have coarser material so MSA is higher you will have less surface area you know less surface area. So, the bond area actually you know it is the stress concentration will be higher in such situation. So, all this discontinuities of the interface stress concentration bond area always actually dominates thus we use generally lower MSA and this we have looked earlier also and we are just re-treating what we said earlier that MSA should be lower in case of high strength matrices. So, generally you know you have much lower MSA in this sort of matrix with low porosity paste its content is increased thus aggregate content is reduced and lower is the dominance of it is. So, fine may to fine aggregate again you might increase you know but volume even if the volume of material remaining same volume of the paste etcetera volume of the paste will generally increase. So, there is you know generally aggregate concentration or volume of the aggregate also reduces somewhat volume of the aggregate would require to be less also. Sometimes this reduction in volume is required in very high strength system in order to ensure that there is bulk shrinkage for example shrinkage in the bulk whole material shinks rather than shrinkage like this rather than shrinkage like this you know this is your matrix and you have got lot of aggregate lot of aggregate let us say lot of aggregate. So, the shrink because this portion shinks this portion shinks this portion aggregate portion shinks I mean sorry the paste portion shinks aggregate do not shrink. So, you might have cracking here cracking here actually you know crack could be developing here because of the shrinkage of this one shrinkage of this one shrinkage of this one but shrinkage of this one but no shrinkage of this one. So, essentially bulk shrinkage can reduce it can actually introduce a kind of compression here on to the aggregate and improve the interfacial bond. So, this is this can reducing the aggregate quantity in higher strength system might have an advantage in terms of this as well right. One thing is reduction on the on the interfacial transition zone volume itself other would be even shrinkage bulk shrinkage the whole thing will shrink together. So, if there is an aggregate this will also since everything shrink less aggregate. So, therefore, this would actually might compress I will get it some. So, this is one fact which should be useful to understand very high strength concrete why it does not use very large size aggregate cement it should be good quality OPC preferably higher quantity of C 3 S and C 2 S with low C 3 A higher quantity of C 2 C 3 S and C 2 S with low C 3 A because this will ensure higher C H formation and less heat of hydration because this is the one which is you know is responsible for heat of hydration it is got the highest heat of hydration. So, heat of hydration will be reduced if I have less C 3 A and this would generate lot of calcium hydroxide which can actually react with the pozzolaneic material to improve the properties altogether. So, more C H S. So, this will also reduce down secondary effect of conversion now what is conversion if you remember we talked of high alumina cement or hydration process of cement system we said that initially first it forms a trinjite which get converted into monosulfate and volume of a trinjite if it is higher then the monosulfate or the final product all the sulfate that forms in the later situations you know from the trinjite then if their volumes are less they should actually introduce new pores because of originality it was larger volume after and later on if it occupies lesser volume this words this would generate a kind of voice now they become important in very high strength system may not be as important in low strength system because there are already existing lot of pores of other kind but here you are trying to reduce all other kind of pores this pores may start becoming may may become dominant. So, therefore, secondary effect of conversion and low heat of hydration would actually it would be better if you have low C 3 A contract low water cement ratio. So, C obviously is usually greater than 400 kg per meter cube cement could be finer which would be easily reactive but should not be too fine to improve or increase the high rate of hydration. So, some people use 53 grade of cement 53 grade of cement by Indian standard but it is not necessary that you is a high strength or finer cement or higher grade of cement higher strength cement for producing high strength concrete even 43 grade can give you good results high heat of hydration will surely be lower in such situation. So, cement should be of good quality of this kind you know for high strength concrete low water cement ratio what are cement ratio it should be less than 0.3 and therefore, would need water reducing as a for consistency that we have seen we have already said that this is what we need for high strength concrete. So, what we are seeing good quality cement preferably with low C 3 A content then water cement ratio it should be lower and you need obviously, WRA with lower WC lower C fine Poisson and I used so, use fine Poisson and are together you know with this and it is a effect is something like this water cement ratio ranges from 0.22 point 0.22 point 3 usually lower than 0.2 you know there are other kind of problems comes in you may not get simply you may not get high strength concrete system in fact, strength might even start reducing unless you do something more may be heat treatment pressure and those kind of thing. So, lower water cement ratio is lower may require heat and pressure treatment in case of very high strength material. So, basically otherwise you may not get that improvement. So, generally high strength concrete will be restricted to usually 0.27 point 2 8 and so on. So, forth water cement ratio is this but very high strength system might you might get still lower, but below 0.2 might require heat pressure treatment for improvement in the strength you know higher strength. So, let us see how does water reducing agent works this is work cement before they would be touching each other before you have added any you know without any high range water reducing agent kind of flocculate together, but you add high range water reducing agent high range water reducing agent they get adsorbed onto the grains and they would result this kind of dispersion and this is what we have seen already already we have discussed this I have just repeating re-itfrating the whole thing. So, this was the scenario with high range water reducing agent they get better dispersed they get separated out and when you are adding water reducing agent together the silica fume no super plasticizer this is the situation with super plasticizer this will be the situation you know and when you have silica fume or such fine material they will just penetrate they will just penetrate and fill in into this industry. So, this one get pushed apart and they are dispersed with high range water reducing agent that is sulphinated malamine condensates or sulphinated naphthenine condensates or poly carbon silica either type of things you know this is of course, the most is most effective and this with the silica fume you will find silica fume going into the industries. So, when you add this they push them apart just there is a touch and they were not take lomeric kind of forming a kind of clog on large bonds inside this. So, they are now more or less reduced and when silica fume putting they go into the industries of the system and thereby you know the ports actually would further reduce. So, what is happening you have fine material going into this industries fine material going into this industries. So, the pore sizes which were quite large here they are very large here they are very large here very large pore sizes where outer product will anyway deposit but still leave some void if the water cement ratio is high. When you have dispassing agent they will obviously get reduced with a lower water cement ratio surely they would and this is the thing. But if you put fine porous porous porous porousity further reduce because of those fine material going as filler but they has to be dispersed and they should go well in within this pore space and therefore, this together with this helps and you will have pore sizes reduction also. So, in the bulk paste you will have reduced porosity as well as pore size reduction because of two effect one is a filler effect other is a secondary porzolonic reaction effect. So, they will fill in they will get in and they will fill in those spaces as the hydration occurs they you know they will further improve this situation. So, that is that is why you need this system to get high strain concrete if you look at if you recall with this talked about this this is without silica fume and this is with silica fume. So, porosity total porosity this axis is cumulative included volume of mercury. So, if you do a mercury porosimetry how much mercury has altogether penetrated originally penetrated more per kg or whatever it is in some volume or volume per unit volume or per unit mass and this is originally penetrated that means porosite is more. Now, after silica fume this is reduced not only this you see the maximum size here is this where maximum size here is this one. So, therefore, there is a reduction in the size as well as volume of the pores both sizes of the pore reduced and volume of the pore reduced. Now, that is what we have seen because it goes into the interstities of the cement system and therefore, reduce the porosity act as a filler and further it now it will be the interstitial sports between the silica fume themselves you know it will be the simply the pore sizes will be governed by this spaces the interstities space within this system interstities you know if I look at this interstities within this area within this pore area where the interstities of the particles there they will go when govern the pore sizes and that is why they are able to reduce on the pore size so much because pore sizes within the silica fume particle and you know. So, this is not between the cementitious cement particle. So, therefore, this is able to reduce on the pore sizes as well. So, that is why silica fume together with high range water reducing agent are able to reduce the porosity as well as pore size distribution and therefore, improve the strength of the paste if I may call it cement silica fume paste its strength will be improved strength will be improved significantly right. This has been observed by some people and they find the paste strength with silica fume content of course, it does not change much content wise it does not change much there is a reduction the strength of course, 5 percent 10 percent beyond 15 percent then this it you know it is not able to go into the interstities anymore, but you are adding only silica fume alone. So, pore sizes will be smaller, but the total porosity might even you know may not improve any further. So, this is one experimental results supposing I add 20 30 percent silica fume they will be packing you know they would be actually too much quantity. So, they will not only they will push the cement particle out and the porosity within or the pores within the silica fume system will start dominating that is what we talked about when we are talking of particle packing when we are talking of packing densities and so on there is an optimal proportion at which actually your packing densities maximum. So, here also silica fume is acting as a filler. So, since it goes as a filler there is an optimal quantity besides that actually they will also reduce down the porosity by their secondary reaction. So, adding large quantity of silica fume does not add help not more than 10 15 percent rarely more than that I mean it will never be more than 15 percent. Third aspect of course, is a cost of it it is not a very cheap material. So, it might be costier than cement as I said where if you are importing in India it is about 7 8 times costier than cement. So, therefore, you know you can only use it in limited quantity, but it is use that in an engineered way. So, that advantages is realized in full. So, the strength of the concrete paste strength increases in this manner, but the concrete strength increases significantly. Now, we will come to that why does concrete strength increases significantly, because concrete strength is governed by interfacial transitions on an interfacial transitions on improves. Let us see how does it do let us just see. So, it is that will be improved. So, it is been observed that 0 percent silica fume and 15 percent silica fume this is the 15 percent silica fume situation 0 percent silica fume. So, this is the distance from the bulk paste bulk paste aggregate surface concrete and volume of pores with silica fume of course, bulk paste close to the aggregate 0 percent has got high porosity this is no silica fume no silica fume no silica fume no silica fume no s f. So, you have got close to the interface it is in micron. So, around 5 micron 10 micron you have got no s f high porosity, but if you put silica fume this gets reduced and bulk paste of course, there will be more or less similar bulk paste you know knows this. So, this is with s f with s f. So, bulk paste their porosity are you know similar no s f, but particularly this one it improves and that is why concrete strength improves significantly. Now, how is how is this possible. So, this was earlier our say this is aggregate and this was my cement particle earlier aggregate prior to prior to silica fume at addition or without silica fume. So, this is my interfacial transition zone which will have porosity of this kind which will have porosity of this kind this will have porosity of this kind interfacial transition zone pore sizes and porosity and transition zone thickness would be largely governed by you can say half you know this is the thickness thickness thickness thickness would be half average size of cement particle we can assume that or slightly more may be some somewhat more. Now, what I do I put in actually silica fume there I put in silica fume. So, this is my silica fume they will come and pack in here they will come and pack in here. So, what will happen if they are sufficient now the it is that will be governed by it is that thickness will be governed by dimension of the silica fume half average size of s f because it is that s f which will pack here it is s f silica fume which will pack here silica fume which will pack here you know it will be the at the interfacial transition zone it is a silica fume which will pack in this manner still there will be some interfacial to trans you know porosity transitions on porosity. But silica fume which will come and pack in there would reduce significantly the it is at porosity and size of the it is at porosity improve and secondary porzoronic reaction actually will fill in also the space. So, therefore, that is why we saw that there is significant increase in the concrete strength because it is at porosity improves significantly with addition of silica fume and water reducing agent and this could make it possible. So, I am talking of silica fume it is not necessarily the material be silica fume it could be any material which is fine and has got similar properties in terms of particle size and porzoronic properties. So, any material having similar kind of properties not necessarily silica fume any material and also similar kind of packing characteristics is important to understand the silica fume particles are also spherical in nature which you have seen earlier. So, it should be able to pack and reduce down that it is at porosity and if it is spherical then dispersion is also easier right if it is not so spherical dispersion may not be easier packing may not be easier. So, any porzoronic material or very fine porzoronic material which can go and improve the it is at porosity would actually be useful in making high strength concrete with fly ash also if it is a fine fly ash you might be able to make the same high strength concrete because if it is solo as long as it is able to improve the it is at by and it is fine and it is able to get into the interstices of the cement system then it will be fine. But, all fly ash particle because the silica content is relatively less. So, porzoronic it is also relatively less compared to silica fume. So, anyway this material see have looked into right in the beginning in the first module and we understand their behavior therefore, if we get something something derived out of them judiciously we can use and make at least some strength maybe 60 70 MPH concrete would be much easy to produce even with some good quality or processed fly ash and so on so forth or processed g g b f s or processed material in right depending upon the fineness and porzoronicity etcetera. So, that is what I am saying that we discuss about the interfacial transition zone a little bit later and that is what we talked about. So, that is how they are able to improve now what about the aggregates well I should have a continuous grading and good packing characteristics continuous grading means right from cement or silica fume size to the MSA there should be a continuous grading now this situation can will be understood I will come back to this I will come back to this let see this diagram and we will go back again go back again this is the one I am talking of you see it is a continuous grading is the best thing to have continuous grading is to have a best thing. So, it is I might mix up everything you know fine that is your this is a sieve sizes in millimeter fine material some are the fine material and the quartz material, but I should a grading starting from absolutely fine material of 0 0 1 millimeter which means the micron sizes. So, this is the final grading this is the micron size particle you know this is this is actually we are talking in millimeter this is in millimeter. So, if it is in millimeter 0 0 1 millimeter is actually micron 1 micron sub micron sizes. So, the sub micron size micron size sand size you know quartz size basically 0.12 1 millimeter to about 1 millimeter right. So, 1.18 is a sand size or 1 millimeter quartz fine aggregate sizes this is also fine aggregate this is about quartz aggregate. So, 10 mm size so this is quartz aggregate again quartz aggregate. So, I might have all combinations and make a make a grading such that my packing density is best with everything put together it is the best. So, when I am looking at aggregate I cannot look at in isolation from the paste system therefore, I look at the packing of everything. So, everything should give me the best packing and best packing would also involve volume of paste and rest of the material the quartz aggregate solid material that is there in the concrete system. So, could aggregate packing is very very important in case of aggregate packing continuous grading and aggregate packing, but I would say that today continuous grading is not an issue because we must look at the packing densities and which we have talked about. So, you can find out the packing density of your aggregate system and determine the quantity of paste there. We have also talked about a mixed design procedure using this kind of this kind of concept. So, therefore, one can actually find out the packing density of your different aggregate combination find out the optimal packing density and then use the paste slightly more than that you know and it could be slight still more than that if it is a very high strength system why to reduce down that shrinkage allow bulk shrinkage reduce down the shrinkage. We will look at that sometime later on. So, lower MSA obviously to avoid stress concentration and discontinuity you have talked about. So, MSA will be lower good packing characteristics best packing density I will say and then it must have high modulus and high strength because if it is strength is lower this can restrict the strength of the concrete system itself. So, therefore, because it is against weakest link. So, use a poor aggregate paste strength you improve it is not going to help. So, therefore, your aggregate must have high modulus and high strength and MSA that is why never really exit 10 mm 12 mm although people could get some 60 70 MPO with 20 mm but 20 mm aggregate but it is better to use lower you know if you are not finding the strength reduced down the MSA. So, generally high strength concrete system 10 mm MSA very high strength system very very high strength system there will be no coarse aggregate will come to that sometime later on when you talk of reactive powder concrete. You see basically normal strength concrete if I look at stress strain diagram stress in MPA strain here cement paste is like this aggregate both are brittle anyway aggregate will be somewhere up there. So, the basic overall stress strain diagram of the concrete will be somewhere in between. So, aggregates are natural system they have their own strength and that is usually higher we rarely realize this it is like you know we rarely realize this actually we have because it is controlled by this but in high strength concrete I improve this cement paste therefore, this value goes up here somewhere there you know if I take it if I make it here and this would be somewhere there or if I bring it down you know this strength increases because of this would go up this would go up this whole curve goes up because this is this pushers it up. So, we improve the cement paste we improved the it z and therefore, my aggregate my cement concrete improves. Now, remember if I have this one somewhere there then the strength would be reduced. So, I must have a good high aggregate strength and modulus of elasticity also should be higher because you remember critical stress is a function of modulus of elasticity of the you know concrete system without pores. Now, the modulus of elasticity of the concrete system is a function of the modulus of elasticity of aggregate and as well as the cement paste. So, therefore, you know critical stress will be lowered if I have lower modulus of elasticity. So, of aggregate so therefore, one must look into this it must have good modulus of elasticity good strength good strength it is like you know balanced design balance design balance design if you have you must have done RC design where we try to do a balance design where strength of the concrete you know or concrete and the steel fails together. So, this is a balance system now here actually in it is I was failing earlier I have 3 component I will say the matrix you know I have the paste you know I have the paste matrix the ITZ and aggregate. So, if all of them fail together that would be the most efficient efficient system. So, aggregate ITZ paste everything should fail together. So, earlier when paste strength was low ITZ strength was poorer they would have go dictated the strength, but as soon as I increase the strength of this 2 paste and ITZ strength I increase the aggregate everything may fail together. So, what you see is in case of high strength concrete if you are crushing a cube you might see the crack passing through the aggregate as well. So, it is not only a not only the interfacial transition zone and bypassing the crack I mean the aggregate themselves going through its boundaries to the bulk paste and joining up again the aggregate interface is not be the case here you might find that it passes through the aggregate itself because it is almost a balance system where efficiency of everything is being utilized. And how do you do it by improving the ITZ through fine material, pozzolonic material which can get inside and water reducing agent which will disperse the particle and allow to get into the material to get into them get into the interstices of those cementitious particle and both at the interface of the aggregate system at ITZ as well and improve this porosity and refine the pores. So, that is the principle of high strength concrete that is the principle of high strength concrete just aggregate properties if you look at it for example, modulus of elasticity compressive strength and porosity of some of the aggregate let us say quartzite rock some 87 MP would be the compressive strength 42 is the modulus of elasticity porosity is 1 percent. Motor if I prepared with this quartzite fine particle I get modulus of elasticity slightly reduced if I produce concrete then I can go to 99 MP because if I improve my paste it can show you good strength see this is better than you know water is here and the concrete is somewhere there because I will add quartz aggregate then and this might bring down the strength somewhat larger finer the particle size strength will be higher we talked about that also because all the fractures have already occurred right in a large size aggregate this we talked sometime earlier larger size aggregate there are some filler planes already existing in the aggregate. So, when I crush it this crushing the separation has already occurred in the fracture plane. So, therefore, more surface energy it has already absorbed and it has you know it is actually a fracture energy it has dissipated and therefore, it is more stable finest material is more stable and it strength will be much higher all right. So, therefore, size quartz aggregate when you introduce strength could be reduced somewhat you see rock limestone 115, 106 this is also concrete is 106 and this is sandstone 147 concrete is 107 in between motor is not available modulus of elasticity is 40 here 39, 49 and 45 and so on so forth. So, concrete you know rock has got 49 modulus of elasticity so, both both properties you know the porosity is given this is highly porous material. So, therefore, rock strength although is high this can bring down my strength because the cracks will pass through this and therefore, concrete strength is 147 although strength is it cannot show exhibit that kind of strength. This we have already discussed the particle packing so, therefore, quartzite concrete is somewhere here stress strain curve sandstone concrete somewhere here limestone concrete stress strain curve is somewhere there. High strain concrete therefore, would exhibit a higher strength, but it will fail at lower strain this is not a problem this is not a problem, but we must know it you know because brittleness the ductility of the concrete you know it is we know that concrete is weak in it is brittle therefore, we reinforce it to get the ductility or we you know add 5 hours to get pseudo ductility in micro level. So, that kind of thing so, therefore, this is not a problem this is no advantage neither this is not a, but negative aspect also. So, because high strain matrices we do not rely on the ductility of concrete really delay delay delay on the ductility of the reinforcing material. So, therefore, this in ordinary reinforced concrete structure is not a problem, but there are other places where we take put in fiber to improve for example, engineered cement composites micro fibers might be added to improve the strength. So, but we know that is strength is higher modulus of elasticity is higher if I look at its other properties this is tensile strength this is compressive strength 1 for normal concrete ordinary concrete. So, relative strength I am talking of tensile strength may be 3 times more while its compressive strength may be 2 5 times more. So, relative strength of high strength concrete if it is 2 5 times more compressive strength then tensile strength could be of the similar order or slightly higher. Then this is modulus of elasticity definitely higher these are the fracture properties the various kind of fracture properties I will just define them some of the fracture you know some of the fracture properties for example, energy absorbed will be lower the length of the fracture length around the tip would be lower. So, some some of those things are lower which is actually sign of brittleness and so on so forth. So, some properties strength obviously improves tensile strength also improves modulus of elasticity also improves not to the proportion of the compressive strength, but it improves. So, one got to there are people who have done some research on those look from the design point of view we are talking in terms of just general ideas modulus of elasticity will surely improve, but not as much as the compressive strength tensile strength improves further, but other fracture properties also improves. So, high E low fracture toughness because energy absorbed is less stress strain curve area under the stress strain curve is lower now you know it was somewhere here now this area is lower compared to this. So, therefore toughness could be lower very good durability because low porosity nothing can enter, but one must see against magnesium sulphate because magnesium sulphate can attack the CHS itself. So, the you know it is still good still good against all sulphate you know all kind of durability because it strength it does not allow anything to penetrate to it improve mechanical properties. So, fracture energy KIC stress intensity factor this is lower fracture energy is lower L 0 is the dimensions of micro crack zone ahead of the tip advancing crack this is lower this is lower this is lower that is what we have seen you know that is what we have seen earlier this is lower this is significantly lower. So, is around the crack the micro cracking zone and fracture energy is of similar order and this is this KIC is the intensity factor fracture intensity. So, this stress intensity factor are similar. So, this is some fracture properties this like this fire property is suspect some people say for it is not very good against fire unlike the conventional concrete because of its low porosity when hydrated water wants to get out of the system it is no way to get out one of the theory is put for out therefore, there are cracks you know CHS gel when it breaks down under fire if you heat it to 600 degree centigrade for 500 degree centigrade to 600 degree centigrade CHS gel will break down. So, is calcium hydroxide so, when they break it down 7800 7750 degree centigrade, calculation of you know like calcium hydroxide will break down and it will go out it will remain as calcium oxide and water will H 2 will go. Now, water does not have a way to get out because it is fully dense no porosity. So, therefore, cracking may occur spalling occurs easily. So, fire property is suspect one has to see what properties are good and what properties are not good, but we have seen that is strength is very good durability is also very good and we have also seen the fracture properties creep shrinkage etcetera has also to be seen in this light you know their properties also to be seen. So, maybe next class next lecture will look some of into some of this. So, today in this lecture we have looked into high strength concrete principles and you have looking some properties. Next class we will look into the additional properties whatever is left mixed design procedure then we will look into other high strength system. Thank you very much. === Lecture 35 Transcript === Welcome to module 9 lecture 2. So, in the last lecture we looked into high strength concrete, some properties we had introduction, principles, etcetera, etcetera and some properties. Today we look into some more properties and then basic you know issues, some test that we do for workability and related possible mix design scenario, mix proportioning scenario and then self compacting concrete we will just introduce today. So, that is outline of our discussion today is Hc Hc high strength concrete properties, MDF, macro defect free matrices because other high strength matrices we will look into today and then DSP densified with small particle and reactive powder concrete and just introduction to self compacting concrete. So, some of these we will look into today. So, if you recall in the last class we just said that high strength concrete has got high modulus of elasticity and low fracture toughness because area under the curve is low area under the curve is low. And then it has got very good durability by and large most of the cases it has got very good durability, it has got improved mechanical properties most of it and then fraction energy then stress intensity factor they are better but not proportionally better and CF these are the micro cracked zone dimensions of micro cracked zone have head of tip of advancing crack. There is a again fracture mechanics related properties these are smaller than the normal concrete. Fire properties of course, suspect that is where we stopped in the last class and then let us look into other properties such as creep. Now, creep of high strength concrete both in terms of creep coefficient or specific creep if you recall when we discussed about creep we define creep coefficient as well as specific creep both specific creep both and both are actually significantly lower than normal strength concrete. So, it is significantly lower than normal strength concrete significantly lower than normal strength concrete, normal strength concrete. Now, as we have discussed earlier also that actually creep is relatively less understood you know mechanism is relatively less understood here also seems to be there is a limitation of information and also limitation of understanding. So, but what we understand is creep is lower creep is lower so normal strength concrete significantly lower but we have somewhat better understanding of shrinkage and that is what we have seen earlier also you know when we talked about shrinkage in general the drying shrinkage amongst the there we classified the shrinkage in various classes chemical shrinkage auto genius shrinkage drying shrinkage you know we will classify them all of them plastic shrinkage and drying shrinkage all we classified drying shrinkage is lower because of lower vapour permeability than normal concrete because this is lower. So, vapour cannot get out because the dense structure dense microstructure low capillary porosity less water cement ratio therefore, vapour permeability is lower. So, it does not get dried so easily dried so easily you know vapour does not move out of the system. So, therefore, it has got better drying shrinkage properties it is lower drying shrinkage is lower. So, creep is lower drying shrinkage is also lower. So, this is an advantage in terms of you know usage right but this is not same with auto genius shrinkage on you know because this is higher auto genius shrinkage is higher you know as you can remember it is higher because this has nothing to do with the loss of water. If you recall you know if you remember we discussed that this is the shrinkage that occurs in sealed specimen this occurs in sealed specimen and largely related to when you have a sealed specimen there is no drying nothing is going out chemical shrinkage was related to volume changes right chemical shrinkage was related to stoichiometric volume changes. Auto genius shrinkage is related to in a sealed specimen shrinkage do occur all right there is no drying nothing is going out but because of the self-driccation process water is lost in the system and this water loss causes some kind of system you know shrinkage because there is empty pores with dry empty pores will be there and which means that in the gel will lose some water into those new pores or that would be empty pores that is there and as a result there will be shrinkage. So, this is very much there now this is related to production of more quantity of CHS gel because more you produce CHS gel and other hydration product other hydration product more of the water will be consumed. So, low water cement ratio anyway your space is less it is a dense structure but hydration products would be forming more hydrate CHS gel will be forming silicon film reactant calcium hydroxide it also would form more CHS gel and water is consumed in all the hydration process it all occurs in the presence of water and therefore, this leads to more self-driccation and subsequent internal non availability of water in the pores leading to shrinkage. So, auto genius shrinkage is more and this is of course, a concern in case of high strength concrete like I said fire properties are a concern auto genius shrinkage is also a concern. So, more rapid and it is also more rapid than the normal strength concrete. So, during the time during which your normal strength concrete will let us say show 40 microstron strength say normal strength concrete might show normal strength normal strength normal strength concrete strength concrete may show may exhibit 40 microstrain same time high strength concrete high strength concrete high strength strength concrete may show 100 microstrain. So, at a given time microstrain right. So, at a given time say it is much faster also. So, not only it is more it can be faster so, therefore, this is surely one aspect one must look into right one must look into in case of high strength concrete of course, it has got implication in the design and therefore, it design implication could be quite prominent. Now, you must understand the high strength concrete would be used you cannot you do not use them in all structures high performance concrete you may not use them in all structures all right. In last class we seen that it has got better durability better durability better durability all right. So, you might be using simply high strength concrete or high performance concrete from the durability point of view because it is a dense structure it is a dense structure. So, the places where this is likely to be used are tall buildings long span bridges long span bridges or in extreme severe condition. And there those structure tall structure we know that shrinkages shrinkages got a kind of importance in tall structure tall structure. For example, Petronas tower in Kuala Lumpur also in high strength concrete the the Bombay Bandra only link it uses high performance concrete you know and some of the flyovers in Mumbai J.J hospital J.J hospital flyover I think it is that you know one of the flyovers they have used high strength concrete 70 MPA 75 MPA 90 MPA and so on or 100 MPA concrete. Now, they are being used in such structures where they it may be worthwhile to use them or for that matter the airport terminal new airport terminal in Chennai is using 60 MPA plus M 60 grade concrete or something of that kind. Now, these are the structures where you are using them and some of those long span bridge which are pre stressed the shrinkage could be an issue therefore, one has to think about their implication in design or tall buildings as we said they could be you know they might have their implication in design as well. So, one must look into this. So, therefore, this is important but drying shrinkages lower as we have already said this because of lower vapor permeability than normal strength concrete. So, drying shrinkages lower what are the nice shrinkages higher that is because of you know this no water can get out of it. So, therefore, drying shrinkages generally lower for low vapor permeability but autogenous shrinkages higher. If you are you know the mixes that you should be doing that should look into the packing density and appropriate paste. Now, while talking about mixed proportioning earlier we said that you know you remember we talked about packing density of aggregate system. So, you look into the packing density of aggregate system and then put appropriate paste quantity aggregate packing through experiment better and binary ternary mixture to determine the paste content required. You can follow it up follow it up to assume that there will be fully dispersed paste it will be fully dispersed paste fully dispersed paste. So, paste 15 to 20 percent higher right for silica fume 10 to and silica fume generally is 10 to 15 percent not 15 percent could be 10 percent is a good amount. So, 15 to so you have actually 1 minus packing density 1 minus packing density actually 1 minus packing density I do not remember what I use but just let me put it 1 minus packing density gives you you know whatever value you give multiply this by about or plus 10 to 15 percent extra paste extra water extra paste here to add paste. So, paste here in higher strength concrete could be somewhat higher somewhat higher and silica fume content is this in very high strength matrices this is why. So, just see that it is workable to make it workable paste content would go on the workability as we have discussed earlier. So, it might be 10 15 percent or even less depending upon what is the kind of workability one desires. So, you can determine the paste content and by packing density for water to cement silica cement silica fume water cement t-s ratio what we are saying cement plus silica fume because largely it is silica fume which is used in high strength concrete varying between 0.2 to 25 F c that is 28 days compressive strength may be 110 for moist cured situation that is you know and 125 to 130 if it is point water to water cement t-s ratio being 0.15 steam cured or heat cured and this can result in economy of the section and viable dimensions could be smaller. So, you see you can use about somewhat higher amount of paste obviously the cost will increase cement silica fume everything is going up. But remember here the volume the mass basis silica fume content total cement t-s ratio material may not increase significantly because silica fume is highly reactive and its posolane city is quite high. So, paste 15 to 20 percent higher could be there depending upon the workability requirement silica fume as a percentage of total cement t-s ratio should be around 10 percent maximum 15 percent water to cement ratio 0.2 to 0.25 we will get around 110 MPa concrete that is generally the range. But one has to design this material you know design this material and you can have moist cured. But if it is heat cured you can go to slightly higher lower water cement ratio and get a strength of 125 to 130 and dimension of the section will reduce and therefore and if you are pre stressing it you can imagine you will get 120 MPa concrete and you are pre stressing it it is it can dimension could be significantly low and economy can be achieved even though the cost to the material will be higher and it could be a viable situation and then tall or long span bridges maybe this is a requirement very long longer span. Earlier we could go with M45 grade of concrete in the deck pre stressing 4550 if we are doing pre stressing we could have got to about 120 meter span of pre stress concrete bridges. This high strength concrete you might even go to longer spinoff box glider segmental construction you can actually go to about 120 meter in 1970s the bridges those were constructed with M45 50 grade of concrete, pre stress concrete, box glider you know double cantilever construction maybe suspended span or centrally hinged later on. They could go to 120 meter spans but this could be much here 150 meter span and so on so forth and very high strength system might even take you to 200 meter like reactive powder concrete can take you to 200 meter span so the bridges bridge decks can be also of high strength concrete and so on high performance concrete. So, there you one might use this and this might be economically viable. I have already mentioned the places where they have been used now just plus before that let me let me let us look into this this is very important component one is the packing density issue determine the packing density of all your aggregate system if you want to optimize your paste content and the cost therefore and the super plasticizer compatibility is another issue one of the test used by a lot of people is the mask con test originally meant for you know the mining engineers they used for I think crude oil to find out their flow ability. So, mask con looks like this and you fill this material in a given way 1.2 liter capacity fill it in a given way dimensions are something of this kind and then time required to empty this was found out or time flow for certain period of time you can find out the other it will it will look like this. So, in this access you can say time of flow for certain quantity of the material fixed quantity of the material or complete empty because difficult. So, you might do it in the paste and dosage of super plasticizer you can change and you can see the time of flow reduces as you increase your super plasticizer dosage. So, if the time is low it means flow is better and for different super plasticizer you might get this kind of values might choose a suitable super plasticizer based on this and then optimal super plasticizer content for different silica fume content 0 5 10 15 percent has been plotted here. So, you can see that optimum super plasticizer content is somewhere for the best for the water cement ratio point cementitious ratio of about 0.35 is somewhere here. So, for various water to cementitious ratio as you gone increasing you do not have to increase the optimum super plasticizer dosage remains same. So, you can you can find out the combination or optimum super plasticizer that you require for the best most compatible super plasticizer that you determine from here through mass cone test you can actually determine I am not going to detail into this but actually using mass cone test actually you can find out which is the best super plasticizer and what is optimal dosage. Similarly, you can use slump cone test you know minislam test we talked about minislam test earlier same minislam test you can do use we just talked about this earlier minislam we can do and compatibility you can determine depending upon different time after just mixing if you determine the slump flow which time you know for a given water usually people have been doing for water cement ratio of 0.35 and at 20 degree centigrade and if this is actually reducing down that is the you know the flow total quantity of flow in millimeter the spread spread in millimeter if it reduces with time then this is not compatible but if it no if it remains constant for certain period of time then it is actually compatible. So, details I am not discussing using minislam test you can find out compatibility and also using mass cone test you can find out the best most compatible most suitable most suitable super plasticizer with your paste and then find out the optimal dosage for each percentage of silica fume and water cement ratio water cement ratio you are dealing with and use that actually. So, selection of super plasticizer is very important. So, that was related to high string concrete and high performance concrete now where they have found their use high performance concrete HPC or HSC as I told you examples are patronastower the all the all the tall buildings this days tallest building this days many of them are using actually HSC in India I told you Bandraoli link ceiling many flyovers and buildings in Mumbai they have used greater than you know more than M60 concrete airport new airport terminal building in Chennai that also part of it used M60 grade of concrete it is the signature bridge tower bridge in Delhi maybe it is also using some part of it is high per high string concrete. So, many places this is M60 grade concrete etcetera using worldwide this is become quite popular and useful material. So, with that we of course finish our discussion on high string concrete we can now look into the other high string matrices and one of them is macro defect free cement now what is it water soluble polypire as I told you you know you can apply high pressure you can apply high pressure onto the paste you can apply high pressure onto your paste high pressure onto your paste you know you can apply high pressure onto your paste high pressure onto your paste it is a piston let us say and apply high pressure onto the paste which is there high pressure onto the paste which is there and as you apply high pressure onto the paste you get it sword the string. Now, supposing I do not you know it is very high pressure and I do not want to employ that kind of high pressure. Want to employ some kind of lower pressure then it has been observed that material like material like this high alumina cement, polylinol alcohol and if you apply some pressure you know these are basically this is PBA is what is soluble polymer and some form of cement and apply some pressure and 5 MPa at 80 degree centigrade let us say 5 MPa pressure at 80 degree centigrade 5 MPa pressure at 80 degree centigrade for 10 minutes and then give one treatment one treatment at 80 degree centigrade for 24 hours and result is a very strong material. So, strength could be compressive strength could be as good as 400 MPa and its modulus of elasticity could be 42 50 GPA. So, this is macro defect free cement all right. So, this is another high strength matrix but this is of course, kind of not readily available is a factor produced system and when used for electronic substrate ceramics and such places. So, this is a high strength matrix very high strength matrix you can see and this you can this is one the other one is a densified with small particle DSP and this is also cement ultra fine particle and use a kind of effective particle dispersant same thing 20 to 30 percent ultra fine material silica fume 70 percent cement and again give a vacuum treatment and vigorous vibration for dispersion you know. So, vacuum treatment and vigorous vibration for dispersion of this particular system and then you might do some high temperature curing after mixing all right with a very low water to cement ratio less than 0.3. Then you can get a compressive strength of this cement as greater than 150 MPa. So, this is densified with small particle DSP cement and you can get strength as goes as 150 MPa or greater than 150 MPa. Now, this can be used together with aggregate or sand you know course or fine aggregate and you can make mortar out of this or concrete and you can see the properties that you will like to get for example, MSS 16 maximum size of aggregate 16 granite aggregate you can get a compressive strength of 125 MPa and modulus of elasticity dynamic modulus of elasticity 68. You use same size of MSA use another kind of aggregate diabase you get 168 MPa with this dynamic modulus around 65. You remember dynamic modulus we talked about dynamic modulus we determine it through actually by you know by by actually acoustic or mechanical waves by impinging mechanical waves. Now 10 mm MSA, Kelsain Boxite aggregate type the strength goes to 218 MPa with the modulus of elasticity going to 190 MPa still use finer one 4 mm aggregate that means no large aggregate coarse aggregate is missing Kelsain Boxite and strength is 268 MPa and 108 is a modulus so you can see that you can go to fairly high strength I mean quite high strength using this material when you are using aggregate but MSA higher obviously gives you lower strength stress concentration non uniformity all that we talked about because of that when you have finer and no no coarse aggregate strength is much higher. So there another kind of material which was developed originally in France and possibly quite promising of the similar sort of high strength matrices is reactive powder concrete. Now followed from this actually if I look at I will just come to reactive powder concrete in a minute but where can I use this GSP can be used in flooring you know high strength concrete I forgot to tell you higher the strength of concrete is a you know abrasion resistance is very good that is what we have sent. So your high strength concrete will have a very good abrasion resistance so you can use that in flooring now you want till better abrasion resistance DSP could serve you good safe nuclear entrapment tooling and molding over lower existing concrete as repair material over lower existing concrete as you know like kind of not repair protective material protection material. So it can give you good protection against thin layer may give you good protection against external environment. So this is where DSPs have been used but then I was talking of reactive powder concrete. Reactive powder concrete we have seen while just talking about DSP that if as I eliminate out the coarse aggregate discontinued when it discontinued is vanishes and stress concentration those effect actually vanishes and it becomes uniform material homogenous material uniform material throughout by and large you know. So in this one coarse aggregate is completely eliminated and fines quartz sand or steel powder maximum dimension 600 micron 600 micron. So even the final you are not using all fine aggregate sizes not going to 4.75 mm. So it is reduced down further from 4 mm I talked about to now 0.6 mm and improved this mechanical properties the paste is improved all right then reduction in the aggregate to matrix ratio about 20 percent higher paste then that required for optimal packing of aggregate why is it so to reduce down the shrinkage because now it will shrink in bulk as I told you it will shrink in bulk that means it will change its size dimension in this manner. And if you had an aggregate inside let us say if you had an aggregate inside that will get compressed rather than any kind of stresses or cracks of the interface. So this will not be there this will simply this will not be there this cracks will not be there instead this will actually get compressed from all this direction because of bulk shrinkage. So when you are higher paste content so if you can if I just look at it normal concrete will have paste content around 30 percent or so 28 32 32 percent you come to pumpable concrete you require more paste because of the flow characteristics. And we will talk about a concrete called self compacting concrete which you will also need more paste because of its flowability on its own. But from the strength point of view you know like when you are looking at higher strength matrices again paste content increases that is largely because we want to bring in homogeneity in one thing and then get rid of the interfacial you know shrinkage that is there because aggregate zone shrink paste will shrink. But if the whole system is shrinking in bulk with a less quantity of aggregate inside the interfacial discontinuity or flow or cracking that would be relatively less right in the beginning before any load has been applied. So use actually higher amount of paste than required for optimal packing. Now you have to determine plastic property by thorough rheological analysis in this kind of material. So that is you know this is how we get it reactive powder concrete we enhance the homogeneity we enhance the homogeneity by you know enhance the homogeneity by enhance the homogeneity by enhance this homogeneity we enhance the homogeneity by elimination of coarse aggregate. The compacted density by optimization of granular mixture. So you have to do a thorough packing density scenario apply but this is additional apply pressure before and during setting. Now this would ensure further compaction and if you are going to a very high strength this is your situation this would be a requirement. Microstructure enhancement by post set heat treatment treatment. So you are actually doing you know all kind of conversion everything should finish quickly. So you know microstructure is being enhanced by post set heat treatment and if I want to increase the ductility of this material this material will be fully brittle but as a material if I want to improve its ductility I might put in steel fibers or some other fibers particularly steel fibers would be useful fine steel fiber but the carbon fibers graphene and such things could also be good you know nano fibers for example which are to be solved as yet but steel fibers fine you know micro fibers small size fibers can improve its ductility property of the material as a whole right. Now this is one extremities of this one it could be as low as 0.08 water to cementitious ratio water to cementitious I will call it CM rather than CL on water to cementitious ratio CM quartz aggregate quartz aggregate has been used quartz aggregate has been used powder seven fully dispersed least agglomerated and you apply a pressure of 50 MPa to reduce air bubbles and we can maintain through out setting of 6 to 10 hours. Heat treatment after the concrete is set simply by by ambient pressure ambient pressure at ambient pressure you know heat treatment at ambient pressure. So this is what reactive powder concrete and what you get you get something like this there are two grades RPC RPC 200 grade and RPC 800 grade. So RPC 200 grade no pre setting pressure required none but 800 grade unit 850 MPa pressure that is what I am talking about heat treatment 20 to 90 degree and 252 400 degree auto clay situation may be the heat treatment would be there. So there is a pressure and also you know you might you might do a heat treatment at higher temperature. Obviously the name suggests 200 grade so 170 to 230 MPa this one is 490 to 600 MPa using quartz all right if you are using quartz 0.6 mm down and if it is steel balls or steel powders then you can get as higher strength as 800 MPa or 810 MPa. So that is why the grade name is 800 right and flexural strength 30 to 60 30 to 64 quartz and 45 to 141 or steel. Now you see the potential of this material 200 grade first let us look at you know if I get 175 180 and priestess it. So it is at least 151 16 tension as well as in compression that is the kind of load it can carry. So the section dimensions actually can be comparable to the steel sections and may turn out to be when cheaper in some situation but remember it has to be precast you cannot make it you cannot make it in situ this has to be factory produce material it has to be factory produce material and in fact it has been shown some of the materials produced for example duct ductile is of the similar principle its dimensions could be almost similar for example you have you have steel section of this kind I section and you know you can have concrete section of the similar kind having concrete this is concrete this is steel this is steel dimensions could be almost similar to take same kind of loads. So you see this is this material has got an advantage this material has got an advantage let us look at other properties fracture energy is low because it should be because you know no stress strain curve is almost vertical basically it is very brittle material if you have not added fiber and they still lower it is still lower you know per meter square joules per meter square and ultimate elongation is low here it is very small. So there is hardly any elongation it is actually has a high modulus relatively higher modulus modulus of elasticity 50 to 60 GP and 65 to 75 GP. So this material is potential this material has got significant potential actually and been attempted first I think in Canada in summer around 1990s it is actually originally developed in France but first pedestrian bridge was constructed in Canada summer around 1997 long span and then also in forest number of places actually some of this has been tried as a structural material and commercial product like ductile which is possibly based on similar principle produced by Lafars or there are similar other products by some other company yes they they are pre cast elements possibly are available but this has to be factory produced totally in controlled condition otherwise you cannot produce this material. So it has to be industrialized construction but the material has got big advantage if you are looking for for very long span or very tall buildings there it will have a big advantage. The cost is also not you know it will be obviously higher than let us high strength concult and so on but looking at everything put together like by like comparison if one does perhaps many cases this material also may be viable. At the moment of course in Indian scenario I am not come across a situation where RPC has been used but it has got potential for very tall buildings and long span bridges and so on so forth. So this is reactive powder concrete this is reactive powder concrete right this is reactive powder concrete alright. So last in our discussion today is self compacting concrete which I will just introduce which I will just introduce and discuss a little bit today and discuss the rest of it in the next class. Self compacting concrete how do I define? Well it is the concrete it is the concrete it is the concrete you know it is the concrete that is able to flow and feel every part of the corner of the corner of the form work even in the presence of dense reinforcement purely by means of whole weight and without the need for any vibration and other type of compaction. So it is actually it flows originally developed in Japan and Europe basically to get read of vibration for two reasons one the noise in a city you know vibration creates a lot of noise and therefore you want to avoid that there should be no noise. Second thing is there's a cost for vibration there's a cost for vibration and that cost can be eliminated both lever mainly lever cost and so on so forth so that has to be eliminated. So basically idea is that you put the concrete and it will flow so it will flow like this it will flow like this you know you have you put the concrete into the any any part of the structure and it will simply flow. So something like this as it is shown so you have a slum contest slum cone you have just lifted it and it will simply spread all around the places it will flow in all direction. So it will simply flow so therefore flowability is the main concern of this one and it should be able to flow on its own now how can concrete flow we have looked into pumpability and what we said was it can flow because only material that is flowable in such concrete is the water. Now if I have sufficient water in the system and also some kind of dispersant so if you have some kind of disbursement then it can with you know if you want to put too much of water because only thing that is flowable in concrete system is the water but if you can't put too much of water because that will not only increase the water to cement issues or water to cement ratio segregation and similar many other things will occur. So it should have a kind of cohesiveness no internal separation but at the same time it should be able to flow. So it is actually the hyper plasticizer third fourth generation water reducing agent very high or ultra high range water reducing agent that made it possible that made it possible actually for flow you know to make self compacting concrete. Now we talked of polycarboxyl ether remember when we talked of admixtures we talked of polycarboxyl ether which can disperse more because of their comb structure push the particle by static hinderances it is that kind of admixtures which is which actually made it possible to production of self compacting concrete because they can if they normal quantity of water they can push the particle apart and give a lot of flow but at the same time particles should be retained together they should they should they you know they should not separate out. So some stickiness should be there. So some cases people use viscosity modifier which we discussed again earlier some sort of you know sticking property which they have and therefore both this admixture could make self compacting concrete possible. So that is how actually it was developed in part of the Europe and Japan in the early days of its development in 1980s. Now let us look at requirements of self-home compacting concrete first of all it must have filling ability. Feel all corners through flow all corners of the formwork, flow ability ability to flow in the form without vibration no vibration I am not applying any vibration. So it should flow in the form without vibration and because when we talk of compact compaction you remember the normal concrete will sell down at the shape of the formwork. So I need some mobility and actually flow should be there able to flow in the form changes position in the form without vibration here. So that time we are actually enforcing them or ensuring them to vibration the mobility getting the shape of the mold. So there is some amount of movement now here it should move on its own and actually attain the shape of the mold. It should be able to pass through narrow spaces such as rebar without blockage. So if it is self compacting concrete must be able to pass through all reinforcement so passing ability. So filling ability, flow ability and passing ability, filling ability means it should spread and and actually feel the place and then flow ability means if require the spaces they are more you have put in so it should be able to flow and spread it because you might put it in one place and it should feel all the portions so there is some flow is required. Passing ability if there are reinforcement there it should pass through those reinforcement and should have good segregation resistance during flowing and also after it has come to rest. So no segregation after rest means water should not bleed out while flowing stones or the coarse aggregate should not remain somewhere and the water or the paste should not flow away leaving the coarse aggregates. So therefore you know there should not be any kind of segregation or bleeding whatsoever before it has come to rest or during the flow. So this is important and how do we attain this? How do we attain this? I should have a consistent paste and it should be flowing paste itself we are showing. You can just advance a little bit from pumpable concrete what we talked about earlier. So pumpable concrete where you are putting pressures to move self-compacting concrete it should be easily able to pump no problem at all because we are not talking of slump anymore one 20 mm slump or one 30 mm slump for the pumpable concrete it is simply slump flow here as I showed in a photograph earlier and it should be flowable paste and consistent paste hence hyper plasticizer uses must that is what I said and I must have excess paste higher than interstitial volume in aggregate at least by 10 percent because as I said paste is the one which flows I will just explain through a diagram later on this aspect more and lesser coarse aggregate obviously will be the reason you know you have high paste less coarse aggregate and then paste flows and carries aggregate writing it writing with it you know aggregate will have a piggyback ride on the paste itself because there will be embedded in the paste and that is how you can make it self-compacting because aggregates are unlikely to move or flow not they are going to fill in spaces they will have their angle of repose and hold it if they are alone but it is the paste if they are embedded in the paste and then paste moves they should be also having a right onto the paste and then move and that is how it can be self-compacting well plastic on its own with appropriate viscosity that means yield shear stress will be very little I talked of yield shear stress long back when we are talking of you know pumpability compaction on those issues and we talked of Bingham's model if you recall so it should have it should be plastic on its own viscosity so basically you see if you look at it this is your concrete much less aggregate aggregates are much less this is your concrete actually lot of paste less aggregate now if it starts flowing whole thing flows it is actually the paste which flows and they remain in their position the you know the the the there should be relative should not be relative movement between this particle as it flows so you can imagine you have a viscous paste which flows and you have some number of aggregates some number of I aggregate I am saying just supposing is a paste and you made a paste with a hyper plasticizer and a liquid amount of water and a hyper plasticizer it is able to flow now you embed some aggregates onto it just push few aggregates onto it now aggregate will also remain you know embedded in this position and if if the paste has got stickiness it will remain embedded in this position and then move with the paste itself so whole system of the paste moves and therefore embedded aggregate also moves with it as if it is going to have it is having a ride onto the back of the paste so that is the idea that is the idea that is the whole principle so therefore you must have less coarse aggregate content coarse aggregate content is less in this kind of a system all right coarse aggregate content is less in this kind of system so as it flows as it moves out and moves but then relative position remains still same it does not change so after movement it should retain this same thing it should retain its cohesiveness so therefore this is the two these are the two issues in self compacting concrete the paste content should be higher so therefore you have materials of course physical properties of the material specific gravity grading etc are important particle packing density is very important you find out what is the particle packing density and then because you are using different size of size aggregates and then as you pack it you know put lot of paste inside I mean put them inside you know in a larger paste matrix and which should be the so paste matrix volume we can find out from the packing density you might do the same mass cone test to find out the super plasticizer dosage determination optimal one and fresh properties of self compacting concrete we measure by not by conventional slum test etc etc but by slums flow spread B funnel test L box youtube we will discuss some of them and this of course would be good if we can do it but at the moment this is still in developmental state so yield stress and plastic viscosity so if you see the proportion of the mix that would be there water to powder ratio you have sufficient quantity of water so volumetrically water to powder ratio is 0.8 to 1.1 right volumetrically not mass basis mass basis it will be obviously much lower but volume of water must be sufficiently high you can see if this is you know water has got a specific gravity of 1 so multiply 1 by 1 divided by same let us say pure cement then it will be 1 divided by 3.15 but it will some cement some flyers because so much of paste quantity you need in this system that you cannot have only cement you will have to have some kind of filler material large quantity because paste quantity you want to so flyers or something so you will have specific gravity is depending upon the quantity of flyers use let us say 75% point is flyers and 25% is you know 20% is 25% is flyers 2.2 and 75% is cement you can have the volume 1 is to 1 if this is equals to 1 water cement ratio will be this much so you get a strength depending upon this water to cementitious ratio now people ask whether is it possible to make high strength concrete or self compacting well this should be possible but it would depend upon the right kind of mix sufficiently high strength matrix but very high strength and self compacting well that would be a real challenge at the moment we are not talking of that kind of situation we are only right now talking of self compacting scenario so the volume to powder to water to powder ratio now that is why I am talking of powder which might have been you know not cementitious alone not supplementary cementitious material not a CM like flyers silica fume etc etc but we are talking of powder powder means even inert material inert fine material inert fine material they should go into make all this should make into paste they should go into making of paste so they make paste so all that are required to paste so in the paste you have water to powder ratio is very important because we have seen as a water content which gives us consistency right which is what we you know what we call you know the standard consistency is a water which will be just isolating the air bubbles but you got to add more water here because you want real flowability right so therefore the quantity of water to powder that is very important now all particles must be looked into so air bubbles are isolated plus more because you want the flowability of the system so therefore the water to powder ratio is the important issue and total powder content might go to about 400 to 600 kg per cubic meter the reason is very simple because you want sufficient quantity of paste that is what you have seen so you must want sufficient quantity of paste this is 20 to 35 percent of mixed volume now if you look at normal concrete supposing you have what about you will have about 1100 to 1100 or 11200 kg per meter cube of concrete the volume of you know mass of aggregate divide by 2.6 right that is the volume of aggregate 2.6 if you divide and the concrete is 2400 kg per meter cube divide by 2.4 let us say you know specific gravity of the solid particle means something like this so you can find out this will be nearly 50 percent in normal concrete this will be nearly normal concrete this is nearly 50 percent coarse aggregate content would be nearly 50 percent in normal concrete coarse aggregate content could be nearly very close to 50 percent 45 50 percent but here it is 28 to 35 percent because they got to have a piggy back ride on the paste or mortar coarse aggregate will have a ride on the mortar mortar should flow and they are sitting on top of the you know mortar and they are just enjoying their journey and go to the right position so obviously the mortar content will increase mortar content will increase so obviously the mortar content will increase mortar content will increase water content of course around 200 kg per cubic meter depending upon the water to cementitious ratio but orders would be of the similar that means what you are doing you are not reduce in high strength concrete system you reduce the water too much to get the strength cementitious you keep saying so your water cementitious ratio is higher I mean sorry lower to get the strength here you need not may not go for a strength at the moment supposing you are not interested in the strength you can keep the water content high but because you need water to powder ratio to certain level but increase your powder content so paste content total you increase depending but ratio of this water to powder or water to cementitious system would go under strength so water you do not reduce but you still the plasticize that to make it flowable in high strength concrete you use the plasticize or cut down onto the water here to you are taking it to the full advantage of getting as much flow as possible fine aggregate content obviously will be higher because you know in normal concrete it will be around 700 and assume again 2.6 as the specific gravity so the volume would be this much and the content same so roughly around you know you find around maybe 30% is 30 volumetrically volumetrically this might be about less than 30 20 25% 20 25% in case of in case of normal strength normal flow aggregate or normal aggregate normal concrete but here mass basis 42 55% of the total aggregate weight much higher so in normal concrete will be 700 divided by let us say 200 so this is less than this would be this you know this this total aggregate total aggregate content is actually here the sand content would be higher because aggregate content is going out overall volume of the aggregate system is lower paste is higher sand would be sand would be of this sort of sorry sand would be of this sort of quantities. So sand would be sand would be of this sort of quantities you know sand would be of this sort of quantities sand would be sand would be of this sort of quantities so that is how typically the fine aggregate you know the proportions of the self-compacting concrete. So we just introduce the self-compacting concrete in this discussion so we can actually look into the summary of this particular one here summary you can look into what you have looked into summary what you have looked into number one we looked some properties of high strength concrete then we have looked into some other very high strength matrices then we introduced our self-compacting concrete in the next class we will look into self-compacting concrete to start it and if time permits we will go to other concrete such as fiber-inputs concrete. So with this I think we can conclude our discussion on this what we have seen is we have seen high strength concrete high strength concrete basically right from the beginning what is the principle and the history we also discussed a little bit of history of the self-compacting concrete today and the other high strength matrices. So and finally we have come to the flowability the high performance one of the other kind of performance of the concrete that is your flow properties or compaction properties self-compacting concrete that is what we will look into. So with this actually we would like to finish this discussion thank you. === Lecture 36 Transcript === We introduced, we discussed on the last lecture, we talked about self compacting concrete, we will continue with that today, but at the end we will also introduce fiber concrete. So, outline of today's lecture would be some test for self compacting concrete, it use advantages and then we will have interaction to fiber concrete. Just to remember what we did in the last discussion, last lecture, we said that what it to powder ratio should be 0.8 to 1.1 by volume, something of that order total powder content ranges from about 400 kg per meter cube to 600 kg per meter cube powder remember powder means cement plus cement you know fly ash or any other inert material. So, all that constitute powder, coarse aggregate content 28 to 35% of the mixed volume and water content less than 200 kg per cubic meter, fine aggregate content it is generally higher in this one 48 to 55% of total aggregate and this was possible because of very high range or ultra high range water reducing agent and this is if you look at the plasticizers 1960 super plasticizer you know basically sulphinated malamine formaldehyde and sulphinated naphthaline formaldehyde they are actually 1970s and then polycarboxyl ethytha that was 80s and 90s some modification of this one through polymer modification in between all that occurred and all this led to our honeycomb structure that could be formed you know obtained from this polycarboxyl ethytha type and this is what led to actually SCC this is what led to SCC you know this arrow shows this was led to SCC. So, this is the honeycomb structure and we know that for this one this because of the steric stabilization it would actually disperse the cement grain more and that is what resulted in this kind of concrete that is self compacting concrete self compacting concrete. So, this is what has caused this we discussed earlier how the what is steric stabilization and the kind of PC how do they work this we have discussed when we talked of chemical admixtures to concrete we are just rehydrating the same thing a little bit more and historically this is led to self compacting concrete. So, that is what we are saying that led to self-rock concrete and if you look at the rheology plastic viscosity along this direction yield shear stress along this direction and you know the Newtonian fluid will go somewhere there Newtonian fluid will go somewhere there all right that will be a linear line with yield shear stress being 0. So, flowing concrete should have lot of you know very low flowing concrete will have very low yield shear stress flowing concrete normal concrete lies somewhere there with some amount of yield shear stress and the viscosity being there somewhere right. So, normal concrete will lies somewhere there high strength concrete they have more paste remember and therefore, the change the like the yield shear stress might be somewhere there to yield some of this range right depending upon of course, their flow properties and viscosity ranges varying from this to this. So, this is high strength concrete because the paste content is more and pumping concrete should have low viscosity low yield shear stress and viscosity should be somewhere there right. Now, why yield low the yield shear stress is you know it can withstand some amount of yield shear stress how because it can yield some amount of yield shear stress because you will be pumping them. So, there is a pumping pressure only thing it should remain cohesive and should not segregate internal pressure you know relative motion between particles should not be there within it, but must form a plug and then move. So, that is pumpable concrete now self compacting concrete is somewhere here flowing concrete. So, very little yield shear stress and viscosity ranges from here to there. So, viscosity ranges from here to there. So, that is where in the rheological scenario self compacting concrete location is somewhere there should have very little yield shear stress should flow straight away. So, that is what is you know self compacting concrete. So, it lies here somewhere it lies here somewhere all right. So, the test meant for self compacting concrete. So, we actually looked into all the principles of self compacting concrete what it is why it becomes self compacting etcetera in the last lecture and then continued a little bit now and now we can look into the test methods meant for self compacting concrete. Obviously, since is flowing highly flowing does not require any compaction. So, we cannot use the conventional slump test or compaction factor test you know compaction factor linearly one practically no variation because it will it is you know it will just fill in and obviously, we cannot use V B test which is meant for stiff concrete. So, this is actually V B time will be 0 in all the cases. So, therefore, you have to device new test for this one several test seven device there are large number of them and some of them have been codified in some codes, but you know it is still to be universally accepted single or two tests which would be suitable for self compacting concrete its property to at least define it as a self compacting one there is no single test or you know currently there are large number of tests and they are getting gradually codified. You remember the requirement of self compacting concrete we said it should have filling ability passing ability, flow ability you know and remain cohesive and so on so forth segregation resistance several properties we talked about now there cannot be any single you know single test by which I can determine all those requirements or all those properties. So, how do I measure for example, resistance to segregation it is and quantification is of course, it is still far cry. So, at the moment there is no quantification, but some empirical tests are being devised and we will discuss some of them. So, one of the test is YouTube test. This test is effective only in judging whether or not the concrete and sufficient compactability will it compact itself it will not it will not be able to judge the flow ability to a great extent or other requirements segregation resistance. So, it will not be able to judge the segregation resistance and such thing. If the concrete does not have sufficient self compactability we have to detect the cause of course, and the mic proportion has to be adjusted. I mean there should not be any void in the system it should compact on its own. So, this looks for self compactability how does it look? So, I have actually a YouTube separated by a barrier you know kind of a barrier separated by a barrier alright. So, this is the YouTube this is the YouTube and then there is this the this is a partition and there is a barrier. Now, this is actually a gate which I can open. So, I am feeling the concrete here first dimensions are of the order of around you know whatever is given 660 mm and so, on 260 mm and those kind of thing dimensions are by and large given 280 mm dimensions are given by and large you know the dimensions has to fit in. So, this 280 mm 680 mm and so on so forth and there is a gate which I can open. So, I fill in the concrete here the obstacle and this place there is a gate obstacle also is the rebars are there enforcement bars are there the spacing between their reinforcements are there there actually 16 mm bars and the obstacles are there. So, what you do is followed from this I just lift this up and allow the concrete to move from here allow the concrete to move from here. Now, if it is self compacting then this height should be same. So, if this is not flowing due to low flowability if it is not flowing and it is because of the segregation then it will it cannot be self compacting. So, this is two stiff mix it is a stiff mix does not move at all you know does not move at all very stiff due to low flowability is a stiff mix not self compacting. So, stiff mix it does not move at all only little bit it moves and actually it is two flowable that means, cause might cause segregation water might have moved but the solid might have got stuck here solid might have got got stuck here and thereby resulting in higher density is a solid at this place you know and only water flowing down the solid remaining sort of kind of accumulating here and therefore, it is not self compacting that is why it is not self compacting. A self compacting one will have water of course, if I put it they will have it will adjust it will I just have to equal heights but this is not water. But it should be sufficiently close to each other sufficiently close close to each other. So, this is called YouTube test. So, this test gives us self compactability but slump flow gives us fluidity and deformability. So, two other test one is a slump flow test other is a funnel test have been proposed for testing deformability and viscosity respectively. So, therefore fluidity is determined by slump flow the criteria to satisfy self compacting concrete by slump flow test would be 64 to 75 millimeter centimeter slump flow. IS 456 200 440 2000 of course, defined 600 mm minimum flow to satisfy it as a self compacting concrete right. So, this is actually determines fluidity. Now, how does it do it I will come to this I will come to this this is your slump cone and these are the marking this is about 500 mm and then if you fill it in in the standard manner and as you fill it in lift it up it should get spread like this measure the spread measure this spread. So, this spread is a slump flow and this flow minimum should be this flow minimum should be 64 to 75 centimeter from 30 you know 20 20 centimeter to it should go to about 64 to 75 centimeter IS 456 says minimum it should be 60 centimeter or 600 millimeter to define it as a self compacting. So, minimum for self compacting concrete is given but if it is less than 64 centimeter then it is highly viscous concrete and if the spread is less lower down that means, approaching normal concrete. So, spread should be sufficiently large. So, therefore, viscosity is high viscosity as a tendency if it is lot of resistance then it will not flow. So, it is somewhat measurable measure you know it is related to flow fluidity of the system you know fluidity of the system. So, that is what it is that is what it is the slump flow test and this is very popular because it is an easy test. Be funnel test it gives direct measure of viscosity sort of sort of it gives some direct measure of viscosity that is what is people felt and you have a funnel which is closed at the bottom in the beginning and open the gate at the bottom fill it in a standard manner then the time is measured for discharge of the concrete through the bottom opening which is now for initially closed and then it comes down here and if this time is 10 seconds 10 plus minus 3 seconds then you can say it could be self compacting. So, basically you determine the fluidity and you know this determines viscosity. So, this determines a measure of viscosity this is a measure of viscosity. So, higher flow means what I mean if it takes longer time that means the stiff concrete does not have flow ability is not proper because it is flowing through that you know bottom opening. So, kind of viscosity would dominate. So, if you have too much of friction or viscous resistance then it will take longer time and if it takes too less time maybe this you know it it might have a segregation tendency. So, therefore, that is why that is why it that is why it is 10 plus minus 3 seconds time that is what is V funnel test. Now, segregation resistance is measured by L box test. This is segregation resistance measured by L box test the vertical part of the box is filled with concrete which is left to rest for one minute. During this time the concrete will display whether it is stable or whether there is segregation that means when you keep it one minute in a particle part of the L box which will see just now if it if you leave it for some time if there is too much of water segregation it will come up. So, if it is not segregating then you open the gate as we shall see that you open the gate as we shall see that right. So, it will look like this so this is the L box. So, you fill it this is there is a gate here you close it there are obstacles here bars here. So, gate remains closed and fill in the concrete in a standard manner be they keep it there for one minute or so. And if there is no segregation you know allow it to pass through you know you can judge whether segregation was then open the gate it will pass through this obstacle and fill in the concrete at this portion you know it will fill in the concrete here. So, it will look something like this you know through the obstacle it will pass 200 mm is the width of this one this obstacles are 12 mm bars at 46 you know 46 mm spacing as a rate of fortissing center to center spacing. And as it pass the the concrete here would be like this and this height we call it as h 2 this h 1 this dimension is 750 760 mm this is you know 600 mm and so on so forth and this is 150 mm. So, allow it to pass through it and if this to h 2 and h 2 by h 1 is equals to 1 then it is perfectly self compacting the water would actually make this to height same. But for self compacting concrete this should have a minimum ratio that ratio is 0.8. So, that ratio is 0.8 that ratio is 0.8 so it should be at least 0.8 at least 0.8. So, it should satisfy the criteria satisfies S C C should be h 2 by h 1 should be at least 8. If it is 1 that is very good so it should be 0.8 it should be 0.8 it should be 0.8 so that is what it is. So, this is another test. So, you can see there are several tests so far we have looked into and there are more tests actually for example, shift segregation test. Now, the problem is we are yet to actually you know we are yet to find out first of all the criteria right like we said filling ability passing ability compactability segregation resistance you know fluidity all this there are several requirements. So, if you could how do you quantify this requirement actually to quantify the requirement some sort of test should be devised all right. And, but then they are not all independent because if you have high fluidity maybe that will help in compactability. If you have for example, passing ability that might have again related to flow ability. So, there are there is there are the moment there is a kind of you know kind of no uniformity you see when you are very confident about certain things when understanding has grown very well you need only one test or maybe one parameter to define everything one model at least to define everything. But, here the confidence is yet to build up on the understanding and single tests cannot you know right now there is no single test. So, there are several tests as I said suggested by different people and finally, possibly over the years it will come into a kind of now less you know little get reduced down some more. If one wants to look from fundamentals like Bingham's model then this should have been Bingham's model then this should have been the gamma Eelsia stress and the viscosity you call it nu or mu or whatever it is you call it mu. So, this this could have you know viscosity should have been sufficient, but at the moment this is not really happening that way. For example, we said that gamma versus viscosity if you plot it somewhere here it should lie. So, if there is no way to measure gamma I mean there will no I will say not really no way there is no universally accepted method to measure gamma or mu the rheological properties. But, supposing we could have done this we would have said that said that for being it being self compacting only two one measurement the rheological measurement determine gamma as well as mu and you say if the gamma and mu ranges between this range gamma should range from 0 to something mu should range from this to this then I will call itself but, at the moment we are not at that stage the way to measure this self compactability still not really except universally acceptable and neither the rheological properties no universally acceptable accepted method for measuring rheological properties. I mean rotation viscous meters are there which we talked about the tau versus RPM etcetera etcetera you know remember we showed some graph earlier when we are talking about rheological properties. So, the viscometers themselves are not really so far universally acceptable all right. So, therefore, we have large number of tests so we have one more test that is shift segregation test. Now, this test it measures segregation resistance it measures segregation resistance now what you do you allow the concrete to stand in a bucket for 15 minutes. Four dimensions of this system will be fixed actually four top two on the c of 4.75 centimeter 4.75 millimeter it cannot be centimeter 4.75 millimeter 4.75 millimeter 4.75 millimeter 4 centimeters will be this is known as 4.75 millimeter you know sand size it is the sand size as a mistake. So, with a pan below ratio of the mass passing to poured mass is a measure of segregation resistance. So, what you do you take the top two liter of the from a bucket put it on to the seam and the amount passing through it amount passing through that seam is a it is actually is a measure of segregation resistance because you have kept it for 15 minutes. Now, if there are segregation for example, if the water is coming out and the solids or larger particles etcetera go down below then actually quantity passing through this will be very large. So, if the solid even the finer solid is separating out along with water it is taking out the finer material too much then passing through 4.75 mmc most of it will pass through. So, the quantity that is passing is a measure quantity that is not say or proportion of the mass passing is a measure of segregation resistance. If it is less actually if it is less actually that means, you know the relative proportions of the fines water to the total mass that is that is you know that that that would be I mean that should be appropriate. So, you can actually relate this to the segregation resistance. So, one can relate this to the segregation resistance one can relate this to a segregation resistance 5 to 15 percent is considered satisfactory. Less than 5 percent is high resistance to segregation because nothing is passing and more than 50 percent is possibility of segregation. So, less passes through it first of all you have separated out separated out you know taking only top 2 liters top 2 liters 2 liters from the top. So, if it contains a lot of fines if it contains a lot of fines and not larger material, but supposing it is not segregating larger materials also will be here larger materials also will be here. So, if you take the top 2 liters you know larger measures. So, it is not segregating it right resistance to segregation. So, high segregation resistance might reduced on the flow that is why less than 5 percent may not be desirable, but if more than 15 percent is passing that means, it contains mostly the fines and therefore, majority is passing through it. So, therefore, this is a measure of segregation resistance this is a measure of segregation resistance this is a measure of segregation resistance then this this is another test T 50 test. There is a there is I already talked about L box test some more test we will talk about T 50 tests is time for 15 centimeter slum flow. So, you find out measure that you know measure flow as against time measured flow against some flow against time you know with time how slum flow is changing. So, time at which 50 centimeter slum flow occurs that is T 50 test. So, that gives you T 50 test. So, that is again that is a measure of slump in a way slump retention you know it will be a slump retention or related to you know it is another another test actually. J ring test is slum flow with a ring obstacle. So, you have the same slum flow, but there is an obstacle there is an obstacle there is an obstacle there is an obstacle. So, there will be obstacle obstacle here such a jaring test slum flow ring obstacle provides information of passing ability. So, whether while flowing it is actually trying to combine the fluidity with passing ability it is trying to combine the fluidity with passing ability. So, then you can find out the flow after putting the obstacle what is the flow. So, that would be a kind of measure of fluidity plus passing ability. Field box test that is again a box in which concrete is filled in first then it is allowed to move through some a number of obstacle reinforcement bar etcetera, etcetera in the jaring test also we had reinforcement bars or you know bars making the obstacle through which it has to flow. So, this is also talks about pass a you know it is a box through which concrete is again allowed to pass and passing ability since the abstractions there in forms of in form of bars right. So, this is also is a measure of passing ability. Well there is a number of other test as I said since we are still not in a state to finalize only a few set of test maybe 1 2 3 or 4 or maybe 2 test or 1 test which can measure all the properties. It may be difficult at the moment to measure 1 test, but 1 2 test empirical test therefore, there are number of test. So, a lot of people have developed a lot of test and this is where the state of you know this is the status. So, it discuss some of those tests. We do not have Indian standard, but there is an European one. So, EF NARC is a European one, guidelines 2005 this was available and it includes some of those tests that I just talked about. Then Japanese standard for civil engineering 1998 that developed some of those tests. At the moment Indian standard only talks of 600 mm slump flow. So, the test status of the test are here only. SCC for various applications depending upon the application you will require viscosity from low to high, slump flow from low to higher and passing ability to segregation resistance. Passing ability to segregation resistance all right you know segregation resistance, some cases you would require segregation resistance should not segregate somewhere it should be should have passing ability. So, the kind of some guidelines are available for example, ramps where concrete can slide down you do not want very high viscosity you know. So, it should be lot of resistance to movement which should be kind of sticky. So, therefore, ramps you have low viscosity, lower slump flow, flow ability also you do not need very much, but you need a lot of you know passing ability in this zone you need passing ability all right, passing ability and floors and slabs, tall and slender structures you need low flow low viscosity, but high flow tall slender structure and also passing ability because you might have slender structure lot of reinforcement. So, floor could be you need lot of flow and therefore, should have passing ability all right. This will be part of floors and slabs can be floors of slab, thin floors thin slab, but larger floors and slabs which are flag you might require segregation resistance to be specified and depending upon the situation might require higher slump flow or lower slump flow. They are more more more to this, but I think I have just picked up some of them and in fact you know this just to explain this is this diagram is a little bit high up it could be somewhat down as well. So, for example, floor slab might you know it is okay, but it explains that I should have floor slabs, ordinary floor and slabs slightly thicker could have very low viscosity to high viscosity high slump flow. Of course, the viscosity is somewhere there and segregation resistance could be there, but in some other thin structures thin floor and slabs it will be like this. So, these are the this gives us some idea where you know for what kind of application water you take out. There are more many more like this. So, this is just simple a few of them are shown here. Mix proportioning water to cementitious ratio from string. First of all, you must determine water to cementitious ratio for string. So, this is from string criteria, because that would go on the string. Best combination of C plus Pozolona or any other material that you are able to use. You can use a test called Punka test used for cement fly ash because this uses you know you find out the best packing density that is void at saturation situation. So, what you do you mix C and P that is your cement plus other powder material in the proportion that you like which will vary may be start from 10, go to 15, 20 percent etcetera etcetera. You add them up together mix mix 90 percent 10 percent 85 percent 15 percent 80 percent 20 percent and so on so forth. So, different proportions you can take and then mix for a specific case of 90, 97, 97, 97 plus 10 P. So, this is C and this is P plus this P 10. For specific combination what you do you put them in a container measure their mass etcetera etcetera by various kind of you know several mass assembly container, mass with cement mass with mass with powder other powder material and so on. So, you add right you know proportion add them up in correct proportion add water to the system and remove all voids to find out in the saturated state what is the void content right void content what is the saturation state what is the void content in the saturated state what is the void content you know how much water has gone in actually by various mass measurement and there is a formula available. Then next change it to 85 plus 15 and do this test. So, void content in each stage you can find out and if you know the void content overall volume total volume because mass of the materials are known their specific derivatives are known total voids to a volume of the solids you can find out. So, volume of the solids and volume of the voids are known therefore, you can actually find out packing density you can find out packing density. So, this Pune K test can be used which is actually used for flyers cement combinations you know. So, you can use this test for finding out the best packing density for cement and powder and that combination you can use that combination you can use for your self compacting concrete packing density of aggregate you can measure which you have talked about. So, paste volume would be void volume plus required slum flow this is an empirical formula developed at IIT Madras actually IIT Madras they have developed this but I the equation may be different but the idea is that paste volume is void volume plus how much paste extra paste unit it depend upon required slum flow it depend upon required slum flow but then they found it out to be required slum flow in millimeter minus 321 divided by 4 you know they found it out to be like this. So, for example, if this is about 640 you need or 621 let us say for simple case so 300 divided by 4 void volume 300 divided by 4 must be expressed in terms of volume in some CC or whatever it is. So, this will be 300 divided by 4 whatever you know it is this is a empirical formula. So, the one one all I can say for at the moment is that it will be remember required depend upon the slum flow higher the slum flow required more will the more is a paste volume required and this we have understood from the fundamental because it is a paste on which aggregates will have a kind of a piggyback ride onto the system therefore, it is a it is proportional to it is proportional to proportional to slum flow higher the slum flow required you will require more paste the equation of course, is empirical. So, the units etcetera to be seen but this equation may not be universally valid found out in one case might might somebody else might find out some are different these values and so on, but at least qualitative understanding is very clear void volume plus if you require more slum flow fluid more fluidity then you would require more paste and this is understood this is understandable from our discussion in different lectures this is understandable. Super plus T ser size are those are optimized by slum mini slum test which we talked about. So, 170 spread and no bleeding that is what gives us you know super plus is a dosage first you find out the compatible super plus t ser you can do mini slum test or mass count test or whatever you like as we discussed earlier and this is the guideline given that SP dosage would be 170 spread. So, this 170 spread is what they have actually suggested but it could be different, but more spread with no bleeding from this actually mini slum test you can determine what is the SP dose required. Biscosity modifier if required there is a test marble test which is used for viscosity modification. Wiscose whether you how much quantity of viscosity modifier you need or do you need it at all. The viscosity modifier which I did mention much is required to make you know the if there is to reduce down the segregation you know the improve the segregation resistance. What will happen when you are adding too much of water and too much of and adding the super plus T ser high per plus T ser whatever they are they would have a tendency to actually cause excess dispersion and therefore, the water might get out may not remain may not be within the system. But if you have sufficient fines very fines the powder material then it is still may be holding it particularly flyers etcetera which increases the cohesiveness can hold it on together and internal separation of the it will provide resistance against internal separation of the particle that is particle to particle distance within the whole system of concrete larger particle to larger particle they will not relative motion would be minimal while flowing. But supposing this is not happening then you can use BMA viscosity modifying viscosity modifying agent which are nothing but we said that they would actually increase the stickiness kind of glue they will try to increase the stickiness and that is what we have seen for you know under water concluding also use BMA sort of thing and when we talked of admixtures we talked about this viscosity modifying agent or viscosity modifying agent they are there. So, you might use them now how much quantity you want to use and what you want to use or whether you want to use at all or not you can actually find out from a test called marble test. Other test for self compactability and then of course, you have to do trials. So, there are several tests all those tests YouTube test etcetera etcetera you can also do in addition to doing this kind of test and then do the trials to see their itself compact. So, laboratory to laboratory they will actually select the test. But this is a kind of a guideline one one can use for mixed proportioning as a simple way this is from string C plus P powder combination from Pune K test packing density that you check for aggregate then super plasticizer dosage may be for mini slump test with viscosity modifier application if required from marble test and other test if required. So, what are the advantages? The advantages of bsly fast speed of casting you will self compacting you do not require vibration the speed of casting will increase. Less labor that of course, is an advantage in western countries because as I told you fast it came from this for these two purpose no noise and less labor cutting down on to the labor cost of vibration. So, cost of vibration use of vibration is actually cutting down on there. But then cost of the self compacting concrete will be somewhat higher than normal concrete. But if it is cheaper putting together the labor cost which I am not sure in Indian scenario how does it work. But even it must be working pretty well because this has been self compacting concrete has been actually you know readily taken up by the construction company and several projects actually have been you know have used actually this. For example, first one temple in Chennai then the Delhi metro it has also used and there are several other places this is being used at the moment. So, the total cost must be there must be cost saving must be there in terms of labor saving although the self compacting concrete itself might be slightly cost cost be better compaction surely better compaction and of course, no noise. So, vibration noise would not be there this is advantage cost saving can come because this saving would be there saving on this would be there right cost less labor and even saving on vibration machineries compaction machineries etcetera better surfaced and as I told you it is used in India in many sites many many sites have actually used this self compacting concrete. So, self compacting concrete has been used by in India by many many sites. Well there may be let us see the properties. Strength like normal concrete that is non self compacting concrete you know there is no no really impact on strength really significant but maybe higher. So, strength is like non self compacting concrete because finally, it is the water to cementitious ratio water to cement ratio which you are using as a criteria that go by the strength. Therefore, self compacting concrete it will be as good or as bad or as you design may be higher slightly higher because for better compaction. There should be any question on tensile strength it will be similar as non self compacting concrete after all we have seen that empirically tensile strength is related to the compressive strength. So, therefore, there is no question modulus of elasticity may be slightly lower because of higher paste content now here is a modulus of elasticity we we talked about you know E of the concrete function concrete is a function of E of paste E of paste E of paste paste volume paste volume and E of aggregate and V aggregate. So, since I am increasing V paste and E paste it will depend upon E of the paste. So, it will depend upon the situation where E paste is high that means, in a high strength situation if you have self compacting then modulus may not be lower. So, it will depend upon what is the E of the paste that you are using. So, it could be affected somewhat right slightly lower higher paste content depending upon E of the paste. Might have might have slightly higher creep due to paste because paste is responsible for creep shrinkage etcetera etcetera. So, could be slightly higher because of the paste requirement shrinkage may be you know non same kind of situation might be valedia drying shrinkage if it dries out then drying shrinkage chemical non you know autrogenia and all those shrinkage they may be similar as the non self compacting concrete after all here you know of course, it is related to the permeability of the system. Now, if there is something similar water cementitious ratios all is a similar then it will be similar as a non self compacting concrete, but the paste volume is more. So, if the paste whatever paste volume you know whatever properties are affected by paste volume this will also be affected by the paste volume itself. So, better bond strength more paste could give you better bond strength with the steel. Fire resistance will be similar to non self compacting concrete and durability may be slightly better than better surface because of the better surface concrete. Since, surface may be better it may lead to because we have seen durability is related to surface concrete durability is related to surface concrete all right you know near surface concrete and therefore, this may be slightly better. So, no significant really no significant no significant difference with the no significant difference with the you know non non self compacting concrete in the properties concern most of the properties will be similar most to the properties will be similar and it has been that is why it has been readily it has been readily acceptable by the by the construction industry you know unlike unlike many other new special concrete which are specific application oriented, but self compacting concrete has been actually readily acceptable. The I think the signature bridge in Delhi which is being constructed now is also another example where self compacting concrete is being. So, self compacting concrete has found its use in many many places popularity the cost you know the cost effectiveness is very much there in this particular concrete. So, but it needs lot of understanding you know development of still lot of understanding is required in terms of its fundamental understanding. So, that is what is self compacting concrete one can of course, discuss much more about it in terms of the test methods that has been devised because as I said if you have if it is all universally acceptable then there will be less number of test, but at the moment there are our understanding is yet to develop as far as behavior I mean you know self compactability etcetera etcetera are concerned. Therefore, you have large number of test and one could have covered more, but then our time frame is limited and therefore, this this is what we can discuss you know we can just conclude our discussion on self compacting concrete. So, the next special concrete that we look into is fiber concrete fiber reinforced concrete which I will introduce today and they can again continue with the next lecture. Now, fiber reinforcement has been used for many many long time for many years together in materials for example, use with mud fiber reinforcement with mud mud plus fiber in making idle in making idle in making idle to avoid shrinkage to avoid shrinkage crack to avoid shrinkage cracks, drying shrinkage cracks shrinkage cracks. This been therefore, many many years or similar other material you put fiber to actually which can erase the cracks. Therefore, fiber has been used for many many years and in concrete also it is relatively older compared to other concrete that so far we have discussed. It is older much older because it has been used extensively in tunnel lining in such places over the years. So, let us look at you know where it is used, where it is utility. Now, when we are talking of fiber or fiber reinforced concrete we are essentially talking of short randomly oriented discrete fiber. These are randomly oriented fiber you know just basically randomly oriented fiber. They are not aligned I mean you can align them aligned if you do then it will be very good for example, slurry infiltrated fiber reinforced concrete could be you know you have can have fiber aligned or if it is long fibers you can even align them and possibly make a matter out of it that is a different one but quite commonly used is short randomly oriented discrete fibers that is what we are talking of and they are conventionally different than conventional reinforcement which we normally understand in concrete. They essentially improve the crack error station property pseudo ductility they would provide how they will provide you will look into them. Flexural strength enhancement is there and obviously they do not improve the workability they are like elongated aggregates and therefore, they lower the workability and it will depend upon L by D ratio bleed resistance but provide better bleed resistance. So, we will come to each one of them but just to understand this material let us look at it high obviously, they will have high cement content. MSA is low and why this all this will look into. So, that is the characteristics of fiber reinforced concrete. So, let us say this is your concrete and you have discrete fibers like this are the discrete fiber. So, when the crack comes they will actually bridge the crack you know when the crack comes they will actually bridge the crack and that is how they provide crack error station property. So, that is the understanding or you know where fiber the utility of the fiber or how fiber you know where fiber improves. So, you can now look into some details but before that we can quickly look into some theories which we will discuss little bit today. Supposing this is your material that is your matrix as we call it concrete matrix and I have put some aligned fiber there put some aligned fiber there. Now, I apply tensile load apply tensile load on both this direction apply tensile load on both this direction. Now, actually material is in paras you know materials are in parallel p p load I have applied. So, part of the p will be shared by they will be strain strain will be same epsilon will be same long line fibers under tension that is what we are looking at over a small element it is a small element let us say fiber and matrix have same strain because they have bonded together. So, we assume that there is no slip-aid they bond together. So, load p is the sum of the load carried by both fiber and matrix. If I say v m is the volume at the volume fraction of the matrix then fiber volume will be v f and v m is equals to 1 minus v f. So, v m is equals to 1 minus v f v is the volume fraction of fiber and modulus of elasticity can be simply written as composite modulus of elasticity can be simply written as v m e m and v f e f how it can be written simply because strain is same strain is same you know the strain is same and one can actually show that the tensile strength of the composite will be proportional to fiber strength of the you know stress in the fiber and stress in the matrix volume of the fiber volume of the matrix. We will come to this actually in details but just for the understanding next class we will start from here actually again continuing with the same for short randomly oriented discrete fiber we will we will we will just come to the previous discussion in the next class. So, we can start with actually long a line fiber in an element long a line fiber in an element derive their properties derive their properties long a line fiber in an element in tension. First we are starting with tension because it is the crack a restriction property which is very important. So, fiber actually bridges the crack and therefore, under any pull which causes cracking it errors this. So, to understand that it is better to first look at an element with a line fiber and properties of a line fiber. So, like this I will we will come to this in detail in the next class actually but right now just introduce it to you. So, the modulus of elasticity of the composite we can find out modulus of elasticity of the composite we can find out which would be a function of the modulus of elasticity of the matrix that is your concrete and the volume protection of the concrete and volume fraction of the fiber and modulus of elasticity of the fiber under this kind of loading situation. Similarly, tensile strength of the composite or tensile stress in the composite at any moment of time will be given by this. You can understand this of course, quickly if we can look into sigma c t into a total area if this is the total area a must be equals to that is the force is equals to p and that must be equals to sigma matrix stress multiplied by the area of the matrix plus sigma fiber into area of the fiber. Now, since the lengths are same this line fiber lengths are same. So, multiply everything with L multiply everything with L multiply everything is L. So, I can write sigma c t v is equals to v m you know volume of the matrix v dash of the matrix and into sigma m plus v dash f of the matrix into sigma m. Now, v m dash divided by v m you know I am saying v m dash divided by v is equals to v m that is volume fraction. So, where volume fraction and similarly. So, this is how this equation is obtained this equation is obtained. Now, since the strain is same since the stress strain is same since strain is same stress by strain. So, I can divide sigma c t by epsilon which is same v m by sigma m by epsilon strain in all of them same. So, epsilon m I can write this epsilon composite you know everything is same plus v f sigma f by epsilon f because epsilon m epsilon f is equals to epsilon c composite and therefore, this they are same and this is nothing but stress by strain is modulable elasticity. So, it is a simple equation one can easily derive it right one can easily derive it one can easily derive it easily derive it and but then when it comes to random fiber then what you do you add you add some factors because all the fibers will not be effective they are not a line. So, there will be kind of an orientation factor new oh and length of all the fibers will not be full length. So, there is an equivalent efficiency factor length efficiency factor. So, we call this as orientation efficiency factor length efficiency factor and composite strength composite stress then we can determine in this manner. Similarly, modulus of elasticity also we can looking this manner and this is called length efficiency factor this is called orientation efficiency factor and next class we will look into the same. So, this is the introduction. So, therefore, today what we looked into we looked into some aspect of SEC. Now, what is the aspects of SEC we looked into test today but the principle basic mechanism by which actually we form SEC self compacting concrete we discussed in the previous lecture. Today we discussed about little bit about the VMA sorry the you know what you call the super plasticizer which made it possible little bit about little bit about you know little bit about the principles of self compacting concrete then the test their application usage and advantages etcetera it looked into today and then we just introduce the fiber concrete basic you know what is what it does actually where it is advantages like cracker stations pseudo ductility flexural strength and then we just try to introduce the theory of fiber reinforcement assuming a element in which all fibers are aligned along the direction of flow. We will come back to this in the next class and discuss the fiber concrete in the lecture 4 of this module line. Thank you. === Lecture 37 Transcript === Welcome to module 9 lecture 4. And we will continue with fiber concrete which we just introduced in the last lecture. Now, we look into issues like how it behaves in tension because that is understanding this behavior will allow us to understand the crack characteristic property, also pseudo ductility and various properties of concrete. Then it is advantageous to use fiber concrete in flexure. So, you look into flexure, then you look into types of fiber. But before I just go to the fundamental behavior of fiber concrete under tension, I like to mention two points that this concrete is not a recent development in the sense the use of fiber is age old. Second thing one must understand one must understand that fiber reinforcement is not a replacement for conventional reinforcement steel reinforcement or rebar which you use. In case of such reinforced concrete which is also a composite, the concrete as a material and steel reinforcement as another material they act separately. They are not in the steel is not you know is not reinforcement is not so well distributed into the matrix of the concrete to enhance the properties of the matrix itself. So, it does not enhance the properties of the matrix itself rather x independently and enhance the properties of the section or construction. While this type of fiber reinforcement even though I might add steel fiber, it actually enhances the properties of the matrix itself. So, obviously, we are talking in terms of you know supposing if it improves the tensile load carrying capacity a little bit which it does not really most of it it does not, but flexural load carrying capacity it increases. But by using fiber I cannot replace the conventional reinforcement. So, that should be very clear right in the beginning because they this this fibers essentially improves the flexural load carrying capacity of the matrix itself. In other words what we talked about earlier modulus of rupture you know. So, it will it will it will improve that property. So, that must be understood. So, let us go back to what we looked in the last class right in the beginning. We said that let us take an element small element of fiber concrete. So, I have got fiber where I apply the load along the direction of the fiber right and the fibers are all continuous P is the load I am applying long line fibers under tension that we can look into. So, delta L let us say is the length small element fiber and matrix will have the same strain because we are assuming that there is a pull there is a right kind of bond between the fiber and the matrix. Therefore, fiber and matrix have the same strain. Therefore, load P is a sum of load carried by fiber and matrix part of the load will be carried by the fiber part will be carried by the matrix. Let us say V m is the volume fraction of the fiber I mean matrix and it is equals to 1 minus V m because volume fraction if I look at it total volume let us say volume fraction I am calling of total volume is V a part of it is a fiber and a part of it is matrix some total again makes it V therefore, if I talk of fractional volume some total of the fractional volume is equals to 1 in other words I can say V m plus V f equals to 1 all right or if it was I is calling it volume of matrix plus volume of fiber is equals to total volume and V m is equals to nothing but B met by V and V f is equals to nothing but V fiber fiber by V. So, they are fractions and that is what that is why 1 minus V f 1 minus V f right 1 minus V f. So, V f is the volume fraction of the fiber now I just since you know we look into this last class also you just mentioned total force is P equals to P f plus P m the load carried by the fiber and the load carried by the matrix load carried by the matrix you know if the force P is the load applied. So, matrix carries P m therefore, this is nothing but sigma stress in the matrix I mean composite stress into area of the composite which is the sum total. So, P can be written as sigma a and P f is equals to sigma f the stress in the fiber and a f is a area fraction of the fiber and this portion is the matrix stress stress in the matrix and this is the area of the matrix area of the matrix. So, I can write it like this if the length of this element is delta L let us say this length is delta L just I am taking it as delta L. So, delta L sigma a you know multiply everything by delta length is delta L. So, fiber length is delta L matrix length is also delta L. So, I have delta L everywhere multiplied therefore, I get a f delta L sigma you know a f delta L by V. So, that is the fiber volume divided by overall volume V and this matrix volume by overall volume B therefore, this follows therefore, this follows that sigma composite stress in the composite can be written as the volume fraction of the matrix into stress in the matrix plus volume fraction of fiber into stress in the volume in the fiber itself stress in the fiber itself. So, if I simply now go further a little bit more if I simply now go a little bit more you know this stress divided by strain is same strain is same everywhere epsilon is equals to epsilon fiber is equals to epsilon matrix and you know epsilon composite. So, everything is same all intention because I have applied tension. So, epsilon is same now divide this by epsilon this also by epsilon and this also by epsilon. So, stress by sigma m by epsilon m which is equals to epsilon is the same is nothing, but em. So, therefore, it follows that e composite is equals to vm em plus vf under the condition when load is aligned along the direction of a fiber load and fibers are all aligned and this is how it is this is how it is all right. So, that is what we just looked into in the last class then this is your fibers they are not aligned they are not aligned they are all random and if I apply now load in the same manner as I did earlier then for short randomly oriented discrete fiber that is what our fibers are in concrete they are like this short randomly oriented and they are discrete I can add two factors what will happen because the length is no longer the full length. So, I must multiply the load carried by the fiber or the stress in the fiber by an length efficiency factor which will be a fraction and since they are oriented only the you know only like if this is like this a part of the fiber will be load will come like this. So, part of the fiber will be effective effective in carrying the load. So, therefore, I put what is called orientation efficiency factor. So, orientation efficiency factor therefore, low efficiency factor and orientation efficiency factor therefore, stress now will be orientation efficiency factor and length efficiency factor orientation efficiency factor multiplied by sigma f v f this sigma f has to be multiplied sigma m there is no problem it is same but this part I have to multiply by all the fibers will not be effective. So, I multiply by an orientation efficiency factor and length efficiency factor to get the composite stress. Similarly, the modulus of elasticity now can be related to this modulus of elasticity will be also related to this because this epsilon still the strain you know divide everything by the same strain and you will get by this same efficiency factor we are assuming strain in the strain in the matrix and the fiber is still same there is no slippage they have perfect bond between the two. So, N L N L is called new L is called length efficiency factor it is half for L equals to L C which is called critical length and this equals to L divided by 2 I say LC for L less than LC and 1 minus LC divided by 2 L for L greater than LC. So, you must look at what is LC and how this new values are coming. So, that is what we look into the next slide. Now, first of all LC is the critical length and this is required for development of failure stress of the fiber this is required for development of failure stress of the fiber because I have the fibers inside the matrix. So, when I apply a pull at the boundary at the end of the fiber at the end of the because they are discrete they are not continuous they are discrete. So, if I have this is my matrix the fiber starts from here somewhere they are inside. So, the stress here you know it will be all matrix will be taking the stress and at this point if I have a pull like this at this point stress will be some of the stress will be transferred to the fiber and we assume a linear stress variation through the bond it will be transferred through the bond. So, when I am trying to pull this when I am trying to pull this when I am trying to pull this this will also try to pull this material and at this point here if the matrix is alone taking the pull as the as as I go you know where there are fibers. So, this is my fiber as so fiber will also experience that pull because there is a bond and through the bond some stress will be transferred to the fiber and fiber stress will go on increasing, but it will go to a maximum value possible is sigma f u which is the ultimate fiber ultimate fiber stress or you know ultimate strength of the fiber and after that on the other side also it will experience similar sort of situation. So, it is a kind of development the length required for development of the full failure stress ultimate stress in the fiber. So, that is what I am calling as you know LC LC or it is just let us see we are calling it as LC you know it is we are calling it as LC. So, this diagram will show you this is my LC. So, this is sigma f u. So, this stress will be sigma f u this stress will be sigma f u this stress is sigma f u. So, this stress is sigma f u and this a situation could be there my fiber length is less than this less than LC. So, L is less than LC in that case full stress will not develop it will develop some less amount of stress this will not be sigma f u it is less than sigma f u and in this case sigma f u will develop and beyond that. So, L is greater than greater than LC sigma f u will develop, but after that it fiber cannot carry any more load or any more stress it would have failed. So, therefore, if you know it is longer than that length you know fiber would still carry sigma f u and in rest of the stress has to be carried by the matrix or whatever it is. So, this is if L is greater than this this is the scenario L is greater than this the stress is on this axis this axis is stress. So, we can look at this algebra now. So, efficiency is a you know efficiency fiber efficiency factor is supposing it was continuous fiber then the load that it would have been able to carry. So, it is the ratio of the actual stress that it is carrying average stress the fiber is having to the one if it was a continuous fiber. So, if it was a continuous fiber the stress in the whole of the fiber would have been sigma f u for continuous fiber it would have been simply sigma f u. Now, continuous fiber for continuous fiber this continuous fiber this stress would have been this stress would have been simply sigma f u. So, this would have been sigma throughout it would have been sigma f u, but here this is not a continuous fiber. Therefore, the stress is less now how much is the average stress it is sigma f u at this point 0 there and therefore, it will be average will be somewhere here which will be this triangle divided by the base. So, what is this triangle half sigma f u half sigma f u into L c half sigma f u into L c half sigma f u divided by L c all right half sigma f u divided by L c divided by L c that is the average. So, half sigma f u into L c this divided by L c is the average stress that is this value and this divided by sigma f u which would have been there throughout I will you will give me the length efficiency factor. So, that is what I have done that is what I have done. So, this expression shows this one. So, therefore, it gives you simply this will cancel out this will cancel out this will cancel out this is equals to half. So, length efficiency factor is half for length efficiency factor is half for length efficiency factor is half for L equals to L c. So, that is what we just mentioned earlier in the previous slide length is half for L equals to L c critical length and it is you know if it is it is L divided by 2 L c for L less than L c and 1 minus L c divided by 2 L for L greater than L c. So, let us see for the second case second case what will happen second case what will happen second case what will happen you know second case what will happen let us see in this case the stress here is sigma f sigma f which is less than which is less than sigma f u. How much less the sigma f by sigma f u will be equals to L divided by L c L divided if it was half you know L c then you would have got it because if it was L c you know if this was half L c then the stress in this case it is smaller than this. So, actually this is L let us say this is my L. So, the stress developed would have been sigma f here. So, sigma f by sigma f u will be simply L divided by L c. So, sigma f is equals to sigma f u into L divided by L c sigma f u you know. So, this would be sigma f would have been. So, input so what will be the average stress here average stress here average stress average stress will be half sigma f into L right divided by L is average stress multiplied by not multiplied but sigma f u is what sigma f u is equals to half sigma f u into L divided by L c into L right. And this divided by sigma f u gives with a length efficiency factor. So, this L will cancel out sigma f u will cancel out L will one of the you know sigma f u will cancel out cancel out sigma f u L by L c. So, it is there has to be some L somewhere half sigma f u L the average stress will be divided by this and this divided by sigma f u simply right. But sigma f is equals to sigma f u L divided by L c. So, there is another L anyway here. So, this one L will cancel out but there will be sigma f when you replace there is an L divided by L c. So, you get this as you know in this case you guess get the you get the efficiency factor L divided by L c L divided by L c L divided by L c L divided by L divided by L c. In the second case you get L divided by L c just let let us do it here right now because sigma f is equals to sigma f u L by L c average stress is half sigma f u into L divided by L average stress average stress and new L will be equals to half sigma f L by L will cancel out divided by sigma f u and half remains sigma f is nothing but sigma f u sigma f u L by L c and this divided by another sigma f u because this sigma f u. So, this will cancel out I will be left with half L by L c. So, if it is smaller I will be left with this but if I have if it is longer than L c let us see what will happen just erase this out if it is longer than this now what is the this is sigma f u. So, what is the average average stress is a trapezoidal. So, sigma f u into L is the total L you know so this plus this this plus this we will have to sigma f u and multiplied by this plus this divided by 2. So, this is L plus this is L plus L minus L c L minus L c. So, this is the this distance is L minus L c this is L minus L c this divided by 2 that is the stress average stress will be divided by you know. So, this is the stress. So, this is the area of this triangle divided by L will give us the average stress and this divided by sigma f u will give us the efficiency factor. So, this will cancel out. So, what I am left with twice L minus L c divided by twice L. So, which will give me 1 minus L c divided by 2 L L c divided by 2 L. So, that is the length efficiency factor and that is what we have seen earlier in the previous slide you know we have seen that 1 minus L c divided by 2 L if L is greater than L c. So, if L is greater than L c we see that you know it is 1 minus L c divided by 2 L it is 1 minus L c divided by 2 L. So, here we are efficiency factor length efficiency factor but the orientation efficiency factor I have been suggested by people it is equals to 1 for L line and 1 third to 3 8 for 2 d random in plane right because it can be spreaded in all 3 directions 1 by 3 and 1 by 6 or 1 by 5 for 3 d random right. So, 1 by 6 or 1 by 5 for 3 d random because there are 6 directions. So, orientation factors you know based on simple statistics plus experimental work. So, this has been arrived. So, next we will look into critical fiber volume and that is defined as a fiber volume required to enhance the tensile strength of the matrix. For example, if it put few pieces of fiber in a matrix you know stray pieces of fiber in a matrix 1 or 2 they will not be able to bridge the crack because crack simply may pass in between. So, I need a minimum volume of fiber that will ensure that cracks are bridged cracks are bridged by the fiber you know I need minimum some minimum quantity of fiber when I am sufficient quantity of fiber at least some fiber will be bridging the crack some fiber will be bridging the crack. So, right now to understand that we will have to look into the you know we will have to look into what is the you know what is how how L c is related L c is the critical length that is what we said and L c is actually related to sigma f u r by tau how let us just see because the stress from the fiber to the matrix is transferred through bond. So, if tau is the bond strength if tau is the bond strength so L c by 2 through which sigma f u is developed. So, sigma f u pi r square that is the stress on to the fiber I am talking only of 1 fiber is good enough for my purpose at the moment 1 fiber single piece of fiber in case of a line fiber. So, this is the force into the fiber and that must be transferred through the length of L c through the length of L c you know through the length of L c by 2 through bond through bond. So, if the bond strength is tau twice pi r is the surface perimeter multiplied by L c by 2 that is the area through which actually the bond stress is transferred bond is transferred into the bond strength tau. So, tau multiplied by the this one must be equals to sigma f u by pi r square. So, this should give us L c equals to sigma f u r by tau. So, if you want to find out now the length efficiency factor for a line fiber you got to know the bar diameter you got to know the bond strength bond stress that can develop into sigma f u as a strength you know in the strength of the fiber ultimate strength of the fiber. So, L c can be calculated in this manner and we can now look into critical fiber volume which is required in order to have strength enhancement. So, just consider this diagram this fiber volume varies from 0 to 1 and I plot between strength and fiber volume. Now, you can easily understand that when fiber volume is 0 this is nothing but sigma m u this is sigma m u this is sigma m u right. Now, when I have fiber some fiber volume so, I will have actually sigma you know this this line sigma m u it is sigma m u is when is a fiber volume because we said that sigma composite sigma composite is equals to b m sigma m plus b f sigma f. So, I can write this as b m 1 minus b m because I am plotting against fiber volume fiber volume fraction actually you can see is varies from 0 to 1. So, as I go on increasing the fiber volume b m can be written as 1 minus b f. So, what I will write sigma m u into 1 minus b f at failure because if the fiber is stronger well let me just again introduce tell you this I am talking of the situation where fiber is stronger than the matrix there can be situation where fiber is weaker than the matrix then of course, strength will reduce down sigma m u and you will have a reduction in strength it will have a reduction in strength. But most of the time we use a fiber which will have strength higher than the because you are replacing part of the material this relationship still remains valid that sigma composite is equals to b m sigma m plus b f sigma f. So, if you if you it is if this b f is equals to 0 it is simply sigma m u into and then b becomes 1 straight away. But supposing I my fiber is you know fiber is weak then what will happen this will actually be lower value this will reduce down the strength. So, as I go on increasing the fiber you are replacing a stronger material by a weaker material. So, actually strength will reduce down, but normally we use fiber which is stronger therefore, strength will get enhanced. Now, this sigma m can be written as you know b m can be written as 1 minus b f into sigma m plus b f sigma f. So, you can see say later now supposing the matrix fails earlier. So, this will be sigma m u matrix fails earlier it will be sigma m u and this will sigma f will be equals to actually sigma f will be equals to epsilon at failure epsilon m u into e of the fiber because this matrix fiber will not fail fiber will not fail the stress in the strain in the fiber on the matrix is same as long as you know. So, the load carrying capacity when matrix is just failing will increase in this manner in a form of a straight line all right in the form of a straight line. So, that is what it is. So, therefore, sigma f b f sigma m 1 minus b f that is the line and if it is ultimate then it will be sigma m u. Now, as I increase the fiber strength will increase now just look at the simply fiber you know this is for the fiber sigma f u b f sigma f u is a ultimate ultimate load carrying capacity or ultimate strength of the fiber into b f. So, that would increase in this manner when you have hundreds of this corresponds to actually sigma f u this will corresponds to sigma f u as we shall see because 100 percent and as depending upon. So, this is the contribution of the fiber this is the contribution of the fiber which will increase maximum contribution of the fiber. This is the maximum contribution of the fiber and will increase as I increase my volume fraction. Now, this is this could I can write this is sigma m u b f if this is sigma m u failure sigma m u failure and I can write this is sigma m u b f. Now, as my as my fiber content increases at time comes when you know fiber alone can take the load even if the matrix fail. So, that would require this much fiber content. So, this we call as B crit what is B crit B crit is the fiber content at that fiber content even after matrix has failed strength will be enhanced strength will be announced. So, critical fiber content is that strength critical fiber constraint content is that strength which or that that fiber content at which or beyond which at and beyond which even after the matrix fails the fiber will this should be sigma m u actually sigma m u this you know even after which the even after that when matrix fails the fiber will be able to carry that load. So, matrix cracking once matrix cracks the fiber should be able to carry the load but it does not matter we will see that some cases it does not most many cases it is not because B critical can be very you know such large that you may not be able to add them there are practical difficulties of workability. So, you may not be able to add that we will see that later on but even if you do not add still you get certain properties enhancement okay we will see that. So, but the critical fiber content will be defined like this it is the E of the E of the composite you know modulus of elasticity of the composite into epsilon M u ultimate ultimate strain in the matrix divided by sigma f u. So, because at this point sigma f u v f must be equals to the must be equals to the strength of the composite which is actually the strain is C epsilon f u and modulus of elasticity of the composite is epsilon E c E c. So, this E c E c you know so, we create epsilon M u now epsilon M u E c can be written as you can show that as E c can be you know this can be written as E c is nothing but E of the fiber into E of the fiber into v f plus E of the matrix into 1 minus v f. So, you can write it in this manner write it in this manner and epsilon M u epsilon M u can be epsilon M u can be multiplied here all of them epsilon M u and epsilon M u now this gives you sigma M u. So, sigma M u so, you will get a relationship of this kind E c in this part you know you will get just I am writing this it will be E f V f into epsilon M u plus sigma M u minus sigma M u into v f sigma M u into v f. So, if I take sigma you know if I take if I take out v f common from this. So, I will get a relationship I will get a relationship of sigma M u minus sigma M u minus sigma M u minus sigma M u minus. So, all this will has to be divided by sigma f u. So, if I if I separate this you know you can I can if I write it I mean I think I will do it in this manner maybe I have slide next. So, what I am trying to do is I have got E c epsilon M u and this I am trying to write as E f V f epsilon M u plus E m epsilon M u into 1 minus V f. So, this I will get as E f V f epsilon M u plus E m epsilon M u into 1 minus V f. So, this I will get as E f V f epsilon M u into 1 minus V f. So, this I will get as E f V f epsilon M u plus sigma M u into 1 minus V f. So, this I will get as E f V f epsilon M u plus sigma M u into 1 minus V f. So, if I take V f common I will get sigma M u out plus E f epsilon M u into 1 minus V f epsilon M u minus sigma M u into V f. So, that is what that is what it would be and if I divide this by sigma f u if I divide this by if I divide this by sigma f u. Now, sigma f sigma f can be again related actually sigma f can be related to sigma f sigma f u E f. So, V f crit will be this divided by epsilon M u. So, sigma M u sigma f u epsilon M u just let me just see this one what did I write. So, this is my this is my this is this portion E c into epsilon M u will be given by this. Now, this divided by sigma f u. So, sigma M u divided by this plus epsilon E f epsilon M u minus sigma f u. So, this is the minus E f epsilon M u into I am trying to get an expression for V f. If I am trying to get an expression this divided by sigma f u should be is equals to. So, this is this is everything is you know I am trying to get an expression for V f this must be equals to sigma f u V f crit. This must be equals to sigma f u V f crit sigma f u V f crit because E c E c you know this this E c epsilon M u divided by sigma f u V was equals to V f crit. So, therefore, if I write V f crit. So, this will be also V f crit this will be also this will be also you know. So, it will be expression was epsilon C epsilon M u divided by sigma f u is equals to V f crit. Now, this can be expressed in terms of V f crit and that is what I did and so, what I write is f sigma f u V f crit is equals to E c was what was E c E c was sigma f E c I wrote as sigma f multiplied by what did I do actually write. Just a minute let me raise this out it is this out. So, E c I wrote as composite was composite E was E of the f V f epsilon M u plus E m epsilon M u into 1 minus V f. Now, this will be now V f crit and if you write this expression V f crit you can get on the left hand side, which will be which will have this is nothing but sigma M u. So, V f crit will be V f crit will be written as epsilon you know this V f crit if I just derive it fully sigma f u V f crit is equals to E f V f crit epsilon M u plus sigma M u minus sigma M u into V f crit. So, only term which does not have V f crit is this. So, therefore, V f this I take V f crit common V f crit common here common here and from common from this term. So, I will get sigma f V f crit will be equals to sigma M u divided by sigma f u this term minus E f minus E f epsilon M u E f epsilon M u and then this minus sigma M u minus sigma M u. So, sigma f u so that is what was my expression you know that is what my expression was that is what my expression was sigma M u divided by sigma f u because sigma f f u comes V f crit come on this side and V f crit come on this side also. So, if you take all the terms on the left hand side then you will get only one term which is actually sigma M u that is E m E m into epsilon M u this will remain here and V f crit you can get an expression of this kind. So, you get an expression of V f crit along in this manner V f crit in this manner because we express E c is equals to E of the fiber into V f plus E of the matrix into 1 minus V f 1 minus V f. So, this you just change this and put here V f crit the V f crit terms will go to the left hand side here it is sigma f u V f crit and only term that will be remaining is E m multiplied by epsilon M u which is sigma M u and this expression will result. So, this is the amount of fiber you require to have strength enhancement now you see is dependent on sigma M u sigma f u and of course, the modulus of elasticity of the fiber. So, more the modulus of elasticity of the fiber you will require you know this terms becomes smaller. So, you will require more and so on so forth. So, one can see this is a function of all those this is a function of all those right. So, V f crit one can estimate in this manner right, but it is quite difficult in some fibers to add actually V f critical fiber. So, because of workability and therefore, strength enhancement you may not get, but if you get it well and good it will depend upon of course, the L by D ratio and many other factors which you will look into. But, let us see how does what happens when you have a strong fiber and weak matrix. So, this is my matrix and this is my fibers right and I am applying pull along this direction and let us say again it is all aligned. So, as apply my pull it will matrix is failing fast because I have said my matrix is weak. So, weak matrix it will fail fast and therefore, cracks will come at certain regular spacing cracks will come at certain regular spacing. In fact, at this point in the crack there is some slippage also fiber will take all the load because it is still strong it can take all the load fiber will take all the load and therefore, it will take additional stresses. We will come to this additional stress later on you know we can understand this additional stress will be the stress that was carried by matrix. So, matrix what is carrying actually sigma a mu into v m now this must be the additional stress in the fiber and that must be equals to delta sigma f into v f because volume fraction of the fiber. So, this is the volume fraction of the fiber the fiber quantity is still remaining same that must be equals to. So, additional stress can be simply found out as sigma a mu v m divided by v f that will be the additional stress. So, you will have uniformly distributed crack and not a one single crack and uniformly spaced cracks and that is actually good you know uniformly spaced cracks they will be separated almost by uniform distance as long as it is L in as we are seeing while if you have even short random fiber then also you will have crack spacing aligned you know crack spacing at uniformly distributed large number of cracks cracks rather than one brittle local failure brittle failure. So, you will have large number of cracks they will not allow you know failure to occur in one go in sudden failure will be avoided that is what that makes it ductile right that is why it makes it ductile hydro ductile you call it. So, load from fiber is transferred now if you look at the crack scenario if I look at the crack scenario load at this point it is a fiber which is taking the load from this point load is transferred to the from the fiber to the matrix and of course again in this point it is 0. So, here load is transferred from matrix to the fiber earlier we said that you know just at the end of it transferring from matrix to fiber here from fiber to the matrix because here fiber is carrying everything fiber is carrying everything fiber is carrying all the load. So, load from fiber is transferred to the matrix that is crack to the center from crack to the matrix from crack to the center from crack to the center. Now, on an average number of fiber I can think of number of fiber number of fiber number of fiber number of fiber n I can just write like this V of divided by pi r square if it is aligned we are talking of align scenario. So, V of divided by pi r square volume fraction divided by pi r square that will be the number of fiber actually pi r square into l. So, l is same you know l is length is same. So, it will be simply this should be written as l into area and this also would be you know. So, it would be same pi r square into. So, number of fiber will be written average number of fiber will be like this. So, therefore, single fiber how much is the crack spacing we want to find out because the load is transferred from crack this is my crack to the fiber and maximum stress that can attain in the matrix is sigma m u into v m maximum stress that would be attained in the center will be sigma m u v m and again it is 0. So, this is transferred through x 2 x dash if I call this as 2 x dash if this distance is 2 x dash right or you know x dash. So, if I call this as x dash so, it will be transferred through x dash if whole distance is 2 x dash so, it will be transferred through x dash. So, x dash into y pi r where r is radius of the. So, this is the parameter into x dash into tau is a bond bond stress multiplied by number of fiber that is there per unit volume. So, in this you know your total volume. So, you know volume fraction of this is the fiber, fiber volume fraction into sigma m u that would give me an expression for x dash that is your crack spacing. So, it will give me an expression for crack spacing. So, x dash therefore, you know so, one can write v m sigma m u twice pi r x dash tau n can be replaced simply v f by pi r square and this will result in a simple expression for x dash because r cancels out with this pi cancels out with this. So, I am left with twice tau v f and I am interested in x dash x dash is remaining. So, v m sigma m u and the r here will come here r comes here v f comes here twice tau comes here. So, that is your my crack spacing half crack spacing crack spacing will be twice x dash crack spacing will be twice x dash. So, crack spacing will be twice x dash the strain will actually vary in this manner. How here the strain matrix strain is 0 this is strain this is strain matrix strain is 0 then it reaches to a at the center sigma m u or epsilon m u at here it reaches epsilon m u and then again it comes back to 0. So, actually now the fibers will be additionally strength or stressed additionally stress we have seen the additional stress which was actually we said it was delta sigma f was equals to sigma m u v m divided by E f. So, that is what we said was the additional stress that will be taking into account additional stress. So, this is the additional stress that will be taken by the fiber therefore, correspondingly there will be additional stress strain in the system. So, fiber take more strain and strain here the perfect you know the bond through the bond stress has been transferred to the matrix and they are perfectly bonded here perfectly bonded here and therefore, here it will be epsilon m u in both of them right because they are strain is same in the fiber on the matrix. So, that will be same and again this will reduce down strain in the fiber will increase. So, you would like to find out what is the additional strain in the system if you are interested in finding out this x dash because x dash sorry x dash is but find out the what is the w that is a crack width increase in crack how much is a crack increase in the crack width if you are interested in finding out that then we will find out. So, this what is happening let us understand this. So, from here the strain is increased epsilon m u is here originally fiber was matrix was strain up to this throughout you know now the this strain this amount of strain or you know this this strains have all gone to the fiber it was matrix was equally strained epsilon m u just before failure now this strain has gone to the fiber now this strain has gone to the fiber. So, fiber is additionally stress and eventually fiber was also before phi failure everything was at epsilon m u. So, all fiber as well as matrix and matrix both though were at epsilon m u now this changes occur now this changes occur right now let us find out. So, due to crack and increase in apparent strain overall strain will also increase overall strain will also increase and there is a total elongation would have occurred in the composite total elongation would have occurred in the composite and that would include the crack width that will include the crack width also. So, apparent increase in the strain would be observed now let us see how it is increase in the strain at the point of matrix cracking let us see sigma m u v m divided by v f is the stress right sigma m u v m divided by v m is the additional stress the fiber is taking see this is this term we have already seen that is actually see this divided by e f is the additional strain at that point. So, additional straight strain at this point you know if you look at this is the crack and this is another crack and we said. So, this additional strain is taking delta epsilon c this will be this will be is maximum here and 0 there earlier everybody was taking an epsilon m u now this height would be you know average strain increase would be half of this. So, this height will be bearing this v m sigma m u divided by v f divided by e f. So, this height will be simply v m sigma m u divided by v f divided by e f because this was the additional stress. So, this will be the additional strain here additional strain here additional strain here now half of this is the average increase in the strain in the fiber average strain increase in the fiber. So, delta epsilon c is the average strain increase in the fiber earlier it was epsilon m u right average strain increase in the fiber all right. So, this is what it is so if you write this f sigma m u write it as epsilon m u into e m then you can write it as alpha where alpha is defined as this alpha is defined as this. So, this what we are talking of additional strain in the additional strain in the actually composite will be because everything was at epsilon m u earlier now this is the additional increase now this is the additional increase. So, everything was at epsilon m u earlier this strain we have found out and half of this because it goes from 0 to this height. So, half of this average would be simply given by this and that is how we are finding out. So, this gives you alpha is defined like e m by e m by e m by e m. So, that is the increase therefore, originally originally this strain was originally this is the average increase in the strain average increase in the average increase in the you know like crack width I am trying to find out. So, this is the strain increase into 2 x dash alpha epsilon m u by 2 that is the average increase in the strain and plus epsilon m u was the equal strain everywhere, but there is a minus epsilon m u by 2 as well because the matrix has reduced matrix strain is now not epsilon m u actually it is you know the total strain would be this epsilon m u plus as much as is there. So, but matrix has there is a reduction in the matrix. So, the total you know earlier was earlier the stress in all cases were same. So, earlier stress in all cases were same. So, half this is the increase this is the additional strain being taken by the you know there is a composite there is an increase in the additional strain average increase in the strain and this minus this crack width if I am interested I should be actually finding out this is the additional average increase in the strain minus the matrix has actually there is a reduction in the matrix strain. Now, average strain in the matrix is half epsilon m u by 2 half epsilon m u by 2. So, matrix strain now is half epsilon m u by 2 average strain in the matrix is half epsilon m u by 2 originally it was epsilon m u. So, this multiplied by the length 2 x dash over which it has actually occurred would give you my me it will give me the you know. So, if I bring in 2 I will get it 1 plus alpha epsilon m u. So, this is simple algebra this two will cancel out. So, that is the strain and this diagram shows is shows you that actually this diagram shows you that this diagram shows. So, this was alpha epsilon m u and this height that increase is epsilon m u 1 plus alpha 1 plus alpha, but average will be average increase. So, this is 1 plus alpha that is what we have seen and average will be average will be average increase will be alpha you know half of this half of this it was 1 minus 1 plus alpha it was 1 plus alpha. So, average if I am trying to find out the crack with I can find out by multiplying the length of this one. So, this is the crack with at failure sigma f u of course, is equals to now after that it is a matrix which will take the strain alone and it will be at failure finally sigma f u sigma composite u composite will be sigma f u into b f and that is what is shown that is what is shown in the previous diagram that we have seen previous diagram that we have seen at failure it will be sigma f u you know this this is sigma f u into b f that will be the sigma you know b f at a little failure will occur if it is failing anyway alone. So, if it is failing alone and then it will be sigma f u b f finally, at failure sigma f u b f at finally, at failure right. So, sigma f u strain at failure of course, one can find out what will be the strain at failure because strain at failure will be the less than the ok this diagram will make it clear this diagram is strain at failure will be less by sigma f u failure will be in here, but it would be less by some amount. So, if I look at the stress strain diagram what I will see up to this nothing fails it is epsilon m u then there is a sudden increase of alpha epsilon m u by 2 because because of the crack. So, apparent increase sort of a ductility provided by this and after that it will be f v f curve which would follow and finally, will fail at sigma f u v f. So, this will be sigma f u v f it will fail at sigma f u v f. So, the strain is somewhat less than epsilon f u strain is some strain at failure is somewhat less than sigma f u by how much you know by geometry you can find it out actually from here to here this length. So, it will be epsilon f u minus 1 plus alpha this increase this increase that has occurred 1 plus alpha you know 1 plus alpha epsilon m u. So, epsilon m u 1 plus alpha 2 plus you know 1 plus alpha 2 is here that is because after the crack has formed this is the strain and this is strain plus sigma f u minus you know this is the this is the additional increase between between this point sigma f u minus 1 minus alpha epsilon m u. So, this total gives us actually epsilon f u alpha by 2 epsilon m u. So, you know epsilon this gives us. So, this this is what you know this is this is the strain after the crack has formed that is what you have seen. Then sigma f u v f minus e c epsilon m u divided by f v f thus from the similar triangle that I was talking about and you get it epsilon m u 1 plus alpha by 2 and if you divide by e f by v f. So, this will be alpha I mean epsilon f u because e f divided by sigma f u and e c by e f sigma m u by epsilon m u by v f. So, e c by epsilon m u by e f v f this term will be simply e m v m plus e f v f into epsilon m u replacing e c by this and this will again give you 1 plus alpha epsilon m u. So, therefore, this two terms put together I get the strain at failure and it comes out to be epsilon m f u minus alpha by 2 into epsilon m u because this length this length is same as this length or this is you know if it will have gone here, but now it has gone here that is basically because of this length change. So, it is related to that and from that we have derived from the similarity of triangle this relationship has been derived from the similarity of similarity of triangle this relation you know epsilon f u v f sigma f u v f minus e c epsilon m u this is a stress in the matrix. So, from the similar triangle divided by e f this relationship has been derived and you will have strain at the failure this anyway that is still fiber. So, now supposing I take practical fiber concrete we can you there barely can put in critical fiber. So, this portion we do not get what we normally get is something of this kind you know depending upon your fiber some a or b type say steel fiber concrete percentage of fiber will vary and I can have a small amount of small amount of enhancement. So, with this actually you can look into crack spacing in short fiber crack spacing in you know long fiber we can find out crack spacing in long fiber we can find out now crack spacing in short fiber we can derive from this crack spacing in short fiber we can derive from this all right. So, I think this is what we will look in the next class the continue with this short fiber, but one more thing I just like to mention is that most of the time short fibers do not fail by failure of the fiber snapping of fiber rarely occurs. So, it is essentially the pull out of the fiber which actually causes failure of the fiber. So, short fiber first you look into what will be the crack spacing, but then we will look into the force required for pull out force required for pull out force required for pull out and then force required for pull out and lastly then how does how this although I may not be able to get an enhanced you know enhanced strength, then silestring still I may be able to get enhanced flexural strength. So, we will look into that in the next class in our next lecture. Thank you very much. === Lecture 38 Transcript === Welcome to module 9 lecture 5. We will continue with special concrete and we will first discuss the remaining part of the fiber concrete followed by roller compacted concrete. So, what was left was short random fiber we are looking at a line fiber to understand the basic theories, flexure, workability and durability of fiber concrete and then we will look at roller compacted concrete. Now, if you recall from the last discussion we are talking about the crack width in case of a line fiber. Now, the crack width would be actually crack width you know if you remember it was the continuous system and then the cracks came in between crack came in between and we talked about the strain as well the strains you know the matrix would have now short and a little bit matrix was earlier at epsilon m u strain matrix was at epsilon m u strain. Now, it is part of it is only at epsilon m u that is this point and rest of the place it is less than epsilon m. So, actually the matrix would have short and a little bit matrix would have short and a little bit and the stress from the matrix went into the fiber and therefore, fiber strain actually is higher that is what we have seen in the last fiber strain increased fiber strain increased and stress in the fiber delta sigma fiber we said was actually epsilon you know I mean sigma m u b m divided by this is the stress that has to be taken divided by you know this is a stress that has to be taken divided by b f. So, that is the stress divided by taken so this is a extra stress if you divide this by E f you get the you know if you divide this by E f so epsilon extra you know additional strain additional strain we get by additional strain we get by dividing by E f and then we said that the additional strain will be actually alpha epsilon m u you know additional strain will be alpha epsilon m u at this point it will be alpha epsilon m u and this was already there so total strain will be you know this is the additional strain. So, at this point it is 1 plus alpha epsilon m u at this point so that the average is half alpha epsilon m u so that is the strain in the there is additional strain in the fiber therefore, there is any elongation but the matrix actually so the crack width will be equals to the strain in the fiber minus strain in the fiber so which is the additional strain so additional strain is this you know average additional strain will be this much minus the strain that as you know there will be there will be a minus plus it will be plus actually plus the shortening of the shortening of the matrix. Now, how much the matrix shortened it was originally epsilon m u but now it is average strain in the matrix has become half epsilon m u. So, the shortening of the matrix is this much therefore, this multiplied by the 2 x distance will give you the crack width. So, let us look at this again this is the average strain increase in the fiber this is the average shortening in the matrix therefore, the crack width will be some total of this increase in the fiber strain fiber got elongated matrix got short and gap is the crack width. So, this is the average strain that has been released from the matrix this multiplied by 2 x dash gives me the crack width and you know the average crack width and this is simply nothing but this. So, that is the average crack width we just re-attrating what we talked about at failure actually sigma c u is equals to sigma f u b l because composite now after that the matrix has failed. Now, if the fiber is snapping it will be the sigma f u b f whatever is the type of fiber. So, that is how we got the stress strain diagram and obviously, it is the strain at the fiber we can find out now strain at the fiber we can find out basically we will come back to this but let us look at this diagram strain at this fiber. So, if you look at this diagram this was epsilon m u when the crack started then there is a sudden increase and we said at this point I will have epsilon m u alpha by 2 because total strain in the composite would be the extension of the fiber because the matrix is within the fiber. So, here is the fiber matrix is simply within matrix is simply within. So, length of the fiber totally elongation of the fiber is elongation of the composite as well. So, strain in the composite strain is simply the total. So, epsilon m u was there earlier. So, plus now average increase in the fiber is half alpha epsilon m u by 2. So, at this point it is half epsilon m u by 2. Now, we want to find out now what is the strain at this point strain at this point strain at this point. Now, the stress difference here is this much which is this we know is sigma f u b f this stress here would be sigma f u b f and here it is actually e c epsilon m u because composite modulus of elasticity multiplied by epsilon m u. So, this is the stress difference divided by stress divided by strain is equals to modulus of elasticity. So, modulus of elasticity is e f e f b f because it is only the v f b f here. So, this strain this strain additional strain the strain that is there strain can be written as this divided by e f b f. So, this strain as strain here can be written as this strain here as I am showing will be written as sigma f u b f minus e c epsilon m divided by e f b f and that is what is you know that is e f b f. So, this is this additional strain I can find out and let us see what is the expression for this the expression. So, that is what we are saying epsilon m u 1 plus alpha 2 that is at the matrix failure plus sigma f u b f that is the final stress minus epsilon c epsilon m u e c epsilon m u that is the you know the stress beyond this point at up to failure divided by e f b f. So, that is the additional strain this will be the sum total of strain at failure strain a failure. So, and this can be written as simply divide epsilon f u by f you get sigma f u by f sigma f u by f b f will cancel out I am left with epsilon f u minus e c epsilon m u divided by f b f minus e c epsilon e c epsilon m u divided by f b f. Now, e c can be expressed as a m b m plus e f b f that is what we have seen. And if I divide this by e f b f this will cancel out and this I am calling as alpha e m b m divided by e f I am calling as alpha and this is simply 1. So, it is 1 plus alpha into epsilon m u. So, if I see the failure strain failure strain then failure strain I can write as failure strain I can write as strain at failure will be written as epsilon m u 1 plus 1 plus alpha by 2 which is at the time of matrix cracking. Then we have seen that is equals to epsilon f u minus you know it was minus it was e c epsilon m u divided by you know epsilon m u divided by e f b f and that we have derived just now as 1 plus alpha into epsilon m u. Therefore, if I do a little bit of algebra out of this I get epsilon f u out here epsilon m u is there everywhere I get this well. So, this strain here is epsilon f u minus alpha by 2 into epsilon m u. So, that is the failure strain that is the failure strain, but this is for an ideal sort of a fiber which will have strain enhancement. If you want to find out for real fibers the snapping which is not very important because most of the fibers do not snap unless they are weak fibers, but we add usually strong fibers. So, they do not snap, but the effect of short and random fiber will always be there. So, short and random fibers they are just a strain behavior is actually something like this you know depending upon the type of fiber. If you have sufficient fiber it might be like this in some other cases it will be like this you know quantity of fiber depending upon quantity of fiber. So, it would be either of this kind or of this kind of for example, still fiber concrete it might behave like this it may not show strength enhancement, but it would show a lot of deformation beyond this because the fibers can still after cracking fibers can still withstand the load and do a low level, but lot of deformation will show. So, that is how you get pseudo ductility even in real fibers. All this formally you want to get for real fiber then you have to modify them as far as strength part is concerned by putting in this orientation and length efficiency factor which you have done earlier. So, you have just looked into the crack width for crack width for you know a line fiber just let us look at the and stress strain diagram for a line fiber and then for real fiber because real fiber all this you know modulus of elasticity for real fiber the modulus of elasticity here will be multiplied by this and this and after that also it may not be able to take the take the take the load which may be less than that. So, the load it can carry would depend upon its E f and the V f content which could be low depending upon that situation real fiber behaves in this manner, but then they are short random fibers. So, therefore, crack for short fiber we can look into. So, let us say X d is the length required to transfer load sigma m v m per unit area of composite to the fiber right. So, 2 X d is the crack spacing that is what we have seen actually, but when you have short fiber what will happen? One side you may have some length another side you may have full transfer you know in one side you may have full transfer like this full transfer one one side you may have full transfer like this because it would not be 50 50 divided in both the direction it will be you know the it will be divided. So, sigma f you might attain here sigma f you, but this side it may not be attain. So, some one side you will have length because it is unlikely to be unlikely to be even if you have sufficient length let us say LC 2 L you know critical length if you have critical length also, but then it is very unlikely that both sides it will be 50 50 only one side you will have part development strength you know development length will not be full on this side you may have develop length plus more. So, therefore, the effective number of fibers one can modify we had effective number of fibers earlier n equals to b f divided by pi r square, but now this will get modified by a factor I can multiplied by a factor depend you know multiply by a factor such that if it is full fiber effective then this factor is 1, but if it is only part of the fiber effective then I can take it something like this I can take it something like something like this you know. So, what we are saying 2 i spy r tau x d is the length required to transfer full load which we have discussed you know earlier which we have said earlier it is required to transfer the full load all right and this is the n fiber if it was a line fiber. Now, the number of fiber that will be effective in transferring full load will be 1 minus 2 i spy d divided by l. So, L is greater than 2 i spy d L is greater than 2 i spy d. So, this fraction you know this fraction if it is if it is 1 then there will be no fiber effective because it is you know it will not be only a small fraction will be effective because if it is just L c 1 side you will have you know this there will be not a single fiber will be actually effective to transfer full length on both the sides no because it will be just within the space. So, if this is bigger then a fraction of it will be effective in transferring on both the and the remaining fraction that is 2 x d by l again multiplied by l there will be transferring partly. So, what you are doing here you assume that there will be either transferring 0 or full length therefore, you take the average. So, x d by 2 you take here it is n is the number of fiber for a line situation that is b f divided by pi r square if it is this the amount of fiber which will be able to transfer the load on both the sides fully is given by 1 minus 2 x d by l remaining 2 x d by l will be able to transfer only half on an average remaining number of fiber will be able to transfer because they will either transfer 0 or they will transfer full length. So, you can take half length x d and therefore, this is the this is the bond you know this should be must be equals to sigma m u b m because that is the force that can be sigma m u is you know this gives us the length actually gives us an expression for length which will give us you know this because we have earlier done simply twice pi r tau x n x dash we wrote n n is equals to this. But now, we are writing the same thing with x d as a new terminology using the same thing sigma m u b m. So, this will be an equation and this from this equation if I try to arrive at x d because it will be quadratic equation in x d x d and x d here. So, x d square so, x d can be written as something like this you know. So, x d can be it will be you know it is a quadratic equation to written something of this form. So, where x dash stands for a line fiber situation for x dash we have found out for a line fiber. So, one can write x d will be a function of x d by l how much is the x d gap the you know the x d is just half spacing between the cracks divided by l. So, that is how you can find out. So, it is a quadratic equation and x d can be obtained in this manner for l x dash etcetera etcetera. So, it is a quadratic equation and x dash can be obtained in this manner where l is the length of fiber x dash is for a line fiber and you can obtain in this manner. So, if you plot it against you know if you plot it l by d against x d by x dash x d by x dash. So, when you know if you plot it actually you will get a curve like this it will get a curve like this. So, you it will depend upon l by d because this was this was a function of l by d the you know the relationship between diameter of the r you know the r is coming in here this is a relationship between r. So, as your l by r increases this changes and you can plot it in this manner depending upon l by r. So, as l by r increases l by l is a length by r increases this is a x d by x dash changes in this manner. So, this is the behavior of short fiber and in such case sigma c u will be length efficiency factor sigma f u b f if they are a line and if they are not a line then this will be your then this will be your for randomly oriented both these efficiency factor must be taken into account sigma f u b f that is what you should be taken into account the composite strength. So, the composite ultimate strength will be given by this failure at failure it will be epsilon m u. Now, if it is less then you know if this is less than e c composite e c into epsilon m u then you will find there is a that is the behavior is like this behavior is like this rather than an enhancement you get behavior like this you know if this value is less than e c m c you find the strength to actually reduce. But deformation it can continue because it will not splinter out the fibers will hold it the crack width will initially restricted there will be large number of cracks it small wits and number of them. So, this will be the ultimate strength. So, this will happen when fiber is snapping. But in reality fiber do not snap in reality fiber do not snap because short fibers you know they do not really snap and they actually fail by pull out. So, we will come to that. So, number of fibers approximately one can take it as short fiber b by pi r square for one d a line 2 by pi b f by pi r square in 2 d random and number of fibers in 3 d random one can take approximately from you know effective number of fibers in 3 d random orientation this one can take. We took we have written b f divided by pi r square for a line fiber then we have seen if they are short they will not be effective. But we have not talked about the number of fibers we said the effective fiber which will be taking the load for calculating the crack width. But this is that this is what one can assume roughly the number of fibers you know it will be half number of fiber in 3 d random number of fibers along the direction of the load is given by this effective number of fibers. So, as at this short fiber usually fall by pull out because the fibers are strong. So, before they can snap which we have shown earlier we have given the formula for snapping you know nu L nu 0 into sigma f u b f. But that rarely occurs instead they pull out and if they pull out what happens is supposing there is a crack. So, some fibers you know this is your direction of the load this is the crack direction of the load. So, this is the n number of fibers just now we have shown the effective number of fibers in a given direction in the direction of the load you know for 1 d we said it is b f by pi r square for 2 d it is pi by 2 b f by pi r square and for 3 d random it is 1 half pi you know b f by pi r square just now we have seen. So, these are the number of fibers and actually they will tend to align along in the crack they will tend to align along the direction of the direction of the pull direction of the pull. But they then gradually get pulled out. Now, this pulled out length you know this because on this side of the crack I can have either 0 or L by 2 I can have 0 or L by 2. So, on an average I can assume that L by 4 will be the minimum length this is larger this smaller this is larger. So, out of the 2 the minimum length 1 and average will be L by 4 because the minimum length can be either 0 or its maximum value of the minimum length about the crack on the one side of the crack can be L by 2. So, on an average L by 4 is the minimum length and when I am talking of pulling out L by 4 is the average length of pull out you know when it is pulled its pull out fell by pull out this much length it should it should pull out by this much length and L by 4 is the average pull out length I can assume average pull out length is L by 4 and therefore, for 1 fiber tau pi d this is a parameter into L by 4 that is the pull out force required to pull out 1 fiber tau pi d L by 4 is required. Remember when pull out is occurring the bond this is this actually the tau is quite often it is like this initially initially there is a perfect bond. So, if I plot this tau versus pull out length you know pull out length then initially it is perfect bond and it will increase like this as the you know as I try to pull out they go together there is a perfect bond now then there is a bond failure and after that it is a friction which will keep it on. So, the tau might be I might take this as my tau ultimate or tau you know tau ultimate I might take this. So, this tau is that tau which is actually because of friction first because there will be roughness and because of friction. So, actually initially there will be perfect bond once a crack has occurred actually there is the some amount of pull out and this failure might have occurred but beyond that I will have still bond available and pull out would be there. So, I take this value which is the lower value as the value for bond out you know pull out strength or bond strength for pull out. So, tau pi d into L by 4 is a force required to pull out 1 fiber and for n fibers I will require n tau pi pi d into L by 4. So, this is my sigma c. So, all the fibers you have to pull out this will be my sigma c. Now, n is the effective number of fibers it will depend upon type of alignment I have. So, n is the effective number of fibers. So, therefore, you know it will be sigma for 1 for the fiber pull out force we have seen sigma c composite is like that. So, V 4 V f tau pi d L over by 4 pi you know I get the sigma f the stress in the fiber. So, stress in the fiber corresponding to the pull out is basically sigma f V f and V f divided by 4 pi r square 4 pi r square or pi d square by 4. So, sigma f V f is the stress and I said it is n tau n tau pi d L by 4 it was n tau pi d L by 4 because tau pi d pi d into L by 4 is a force for 1 and this can be written as V f by pi r square or pi d square by 4. So, I write 4 this n can be written like this for a line fiber situation pi d L by 4. So, if it is a line fiber situation this pi will cancel out with this d will cancel out with this and I will be left with V f will cancel out from this side. So, I will be left with sigma f is equals to tau L divided by d. So, stress at the pull out is sigma f pi L by d sigma f pi L by d right. So, stress at the pull out is this. So, sigma C u therefore, composite stress composite composite you know the composite strength can be written in terms of sigma f into V f and the stress actually stress in the composite is V f tau L by d because sigma f is this for 1 d L line for 2 d L i V f is for you you know it is all a line fiber I mean sorry this is this is the effective number of fibers is this. So, sigma f stress in 1 fiber is this and for all the fiber 2 d random and 3 d random sigma C u can be written like this. So, when you have fibers damping, fibers snapping the force the tensile strength of the composite will be governed by the pull out force because this is the tensile force in the fiber the matrix has already failed, matrix has cracked and after that the pull out is occurring and this is the stress that the fiber can withstand now that is limited by this the pull out force. So, pull out force in 1 fiber is this for effective number of fibers. So, for 3 d random it is half V f tau L by d that is the composite strength because the pull out will govern although sigma f u has not reached sigma f is governed by the pull out force because it will pull out and the stress that is attained thus the stress the composite can take it multiplied by V f. So, that is how we find out the pull out force. So, this is this is all in axial situation this is all in axial situation when I have a direct tension all this has occurred. Now, let us look at the flexure how does it behave in flexure you know. So, if you look at the stress 10 diagram let us say just before that let me look at the stress 10 diagram then this could be my EC you know EC then there may be at the crack it will look like this when occurring pull out pull out pull out pull out is occurring then there is an increase and after that it could be half V f tau L divided by you know d tau L divided by d if it is 3 d random and if this value if this value is more because it will fail by pull out usually they are not. So, you might get it something like you know this is the ultimate somewhere here. But then lot of basically the matrix you know fiber will go on extending matrix is inside it fiber will go on extending till a situation like this is arise till the gap has become you know the gap between till the gap has become so large such that my fiber is this side the length is more he side the fiber has just come out fiber has just come out. So, this is the point of failure. So, it will actually L by 4 at least it can you know on an average L by 4 deformation it will definitely show. So, depending upon the situation but all the fiber should be there. So, it will be a random scenario many of the fibers possibly will show up here many of the fibers in the last fiber has come out actually or it will snap because there is only one fiber to extend the life. So, there could be some snapping also. So, it will actually behave in this manner and the ultimate strength that we are taking is supposing I take it simply like this. So, stress strain behavior neglecting idealizing it something like this this will be simply sigma f v f which will be equals to half v f tau L by d. So, I can safely assume a long deformation long extension with this kind of you know strength available. So, long deformation I can assume long deformation long elongation I can assume. So, stress strain curve I can idealize like this. Now, in flexure we are talking of improvement of the matrix itself that is why we are talking of modulus of rupture. As I mentioned earlier that we do not talk it is not the same thing as conventional rebar that is not the case. It is actually improves the material itself and therefore, we are talking of modulus of rupture the concrete and this is how we test the modulus of rupture one third loading L by 3 this is L by 3 this is L by 3 you know you have actually 50 mm bar in Indian standard with 40 sorry 50 centimeter with this as 40 centimeter you know and one third one third and the P you apply this is P by 2 and this is P by 2 and you get cracks like this modulus of rupture test that we do because this is your epsilon compression and this is epsilon tension. So, this is the you know and this is the depth of neutral axis at failure crack occurs. So, this is a modulus of rupture test we know and we are trying to see how modulus of rupture changes with the fiber. So, modulus of rupture for three types of stress variation I can assume I said that I can assume simply this type of stress variation compression stress variation will be like this tension in this zone. So, lower strength actually strength is reduced significantly in this one what I just showed ideal but ductile lot of pull out is possible here it is strength enhancement and hand strength but in any case the deformation available is significantly large you know of course strain available corresponding strain available will be significantly large. So, strain available is so, momentum resistance for no fiber reinforcement just just you know. So, what is available is a strain available that is what we will see. So, let us look at momentum resistance for plane concrete this is strangler distribution stress diagram this you know strain distribution and stress distribution both we take triangular. So, this is your sigma compression sigma tension tensile strength modulus of rupture we assume stress and not real stress strain diagram variation we do not take actually real will be something like this in case of concrete. But then we do not take it we take rectangular stress distribution for calculating momentum resistance. So, we can here also we can adopt the same principle and just see how the modulus of rupture change. So, in this case C and T and this distance is 2 third D right C x set here 1 third D by 2 and this is 1 third D by 2. So, this is 2 third D neutral axis at the center we assume sigma compression is equals to sigma of the plane concrete and then I can calculate this out as sigma T sigma T because this will go on failure will not occur here this will go on this will failure will occur here. So, half sigma T into D by 2 half sigma T half of you know this sigma T. So, sigma T into D by 2 so, it is actually sigma T half sigma T into D by 2 that is the triangular area sigma T into D by 2 and of course, the width we are taking this unity this multiplied by so, sigma T D divided by 4 multiplied by 2 D by 3 liberal arm gives me sigma T D square by 6 well this you know variable. So, that is the moment of resistance for plane concrete. Now, let us see fiber concrete moment of resistance for fiber concrete well first we will let us look at the diagram. Now, what we said was the strain will be very very large in fact, the strain diagram if I plot it it will be very very large here large strain diagram strain diagram will be large and what I can do is strain will be very large strain because now it can deform quite a lot, but the stress could be very small sigma C U. So, my neutral axis goes up significantly neutral axis goes up significantly and I can now calculate out the moment of resistance. So, neutral axis strain would be very very large because it can now deform quite a bit you know. So, correspondingly neutral axis will go up there will be lot of rotation available because the crack will not simply open up the fibers will restrain the crack opening and therefore, it is actually will ensure that there is a lot of deformation prior to failure pseudo ductility and my this you know the stress block in the tension zone will be something like this assuming this is the smallest one sigma C U the least value as I showed you idealized one and approximately one can take this as d by 4 because you know d by 2 it was now I take it to be d by 4 at failure strain has increased at the bottom strain has increased so much d by 4. So, therefore, this is d by 4 so this is 3 4 d. So, if it is 3 4 d this is sigma C U into 3 4 d 3 by 4 d that is what I am doing and how much is this distance this is simply this distance is 3 by 8 d this is 3 by 8 d and this distance is actually in a triangle there is a center point of the triangle. So, this was my one third d this is 2 third d so, 2 third 2 third d by 4. So, if I d by 4 so, if I add this up 1 by 6 d plus this is 1 by 6 d plus 3 by 8 d so, this will be actually 24 and 6 is 4 8 is 3 right. So, 3 3 3 9 plus 4 is 13 by 24 24 d this will be you know 6 this will be 6 4s at 24 and 8 is the 24 therefore, 9 plus that is my except this. So, 13 by 4 d and this will turn out to be sigma C U 13 by the 4 is there you know. So, sigma C U 13 by 24 if I calculate out how much this comes to sigma C U 8 32 this is not 30 this is 32 this is 30 look please correct it this will be 32. So, for same moment of resistance this is 32 this is wrong this is 32 same moment of so, this will be 32 13 by 32 d square. So, for same moment of resistance sigma C U 13 by d square so, this comes out to be 4 you know point 4 1. So, this was my sigma T this is 6 this this will come out to be actually this will come out to be this will come out to be d square will cancel out now if you have to have I same moment of resistance if it I have to have same moment of resistance this cancel this out it is not 24 it should be 32 it should be 32. So, this should be this is 24 all right this should be 32 so, this should be 32. So, it is 13 by 32 d square. So, sigma C U moment of resistance is given as sigma C U 13 by 32 d square now if this has to be same as same moment of resistance if I want to get then I want to get a relationship between sigma C U and sigma T. So, this d square will cancel out this is 16 and this 39. So, I will have sigma C U is equals to 16 by 39 sigma T 16 by 39 sigma T roughly 45 you can easily show that it is actually point 4 1 sigma T. So, sigma this so, 2 B 2 have equal moment of resistance what I need this sigma C U I need only 41 percent 41 percent of the tensile strength of the concrete. So, even if there is no and psi and N N strength enhancement then also I will get flexural strength enhancement because to have same moment of resistance now if it is point you know if it is more than 41 percent of the sigma T. Supposing it is sigma T I will get actually 200 percent enhancement strength because it will be so, you know supposing sigma C U is equals to sigma T then moment of resistance will be simply moment of resistance ratio will be given as sigma T 13 by 32 d square divided by sigma T by 6 d square. So, you cancel this out this cancel this out and you will get actually 6 into 13 divided by 32. So, moment of resistance ratio ratio of moment of resistance divided by 32 which means that this is 3 39 this is 16. So, 39 divided by 16 will give me how much 2 point it will be 32. So, 7 72.4 something something. So, you can see that if the tensile strength of the matrix and the tensile ultimate tensile strength of the composite is same I get a flexural strength enhancement moment of resistance and the number 2 point 4 times. So, that is a great thing that is actually that is where the advantage of fiber concrete is. So, thus for post cracking flexural strength enhancement sigma C U need to be more than 41 percent of the matrix tensile strength and if it is same as sigma T you will get more than double 2 point 4 times or you know 4 5 or something whatever it is very large one you know 1 by 0.41 and 1 by 0.41 that much time increase in the nearly 2 you know large increase in the flexural strength. So, even if it maintains same but actually it does not maintain it is lower. So, you always get a flexural strength enhancement even though you may not get a direct tensile strength enhancement direct tensile strength enhancement is difficult in short random fiber. Compressive strength really do not improve because compressive strength is governed by tensile failure. So, it actually does not show any improvement but flexural strength there is a significant improvement right. So, nature of the stress diagram very of course, depending upon type of fiber as I mentioned for example, some fiber might show like this 0.41 should be here then it is good enough for me it is good enough for me just 4 and 1 has to be here and in some cases if it is 1 then I will get so much of increase actually increase in the flexural strength. Therefore, flexural strength of the concrete matrix get improved by putting in fiber by putting in fiber although direct tensile strength monotonyms because direct tensile you can add only 1 2 percent very small quantity volumetric or mass percentage you can you know very small 1 1.5 percent you add because beyond that adding becomes very difficult mixing become difficult there are some effects which will come to. So, therefore, that becomes difficult so, you cannot add that much but even if so and therefore, tensile strength enhancement may not be significant short random fiber the orientation and the shape orientation and the length they actually reduce on the strength further they can pull out this can reduce on the strength but even if it is 0.41 you will get same modulus of rupture it is something like this it will get much better. So, that is the basic understanding of why flexural strength is enhanced in fiber inputs. MR of fiber concrete comparison if you see this is what I is just telling you. Now, to prevent compressive failure this already I have told you that is 2.0 something 39 by 16 times. So, to prevent of course, compressive failure the other criteria composite should not fail in compression. So, if it is if should not fail in compression so, what is the compression load this is sigma compression this is L d by 4. So, this is half d by 4 into sigma compression that is the stress block right that is must be equals to the tensile for you know failure occurs by this. So, at failure sigma compression will be this much at failure the compression will be this much at failure compression will be this much compression will be this much. So, under this condition sigma compressive should be more than 6 times the you know if you calculate this 4 this is 2. So, it is c. So, sigma c u sigma c a come by sigma c u will be given as 6. So, it should be greater than 6 the you know the compressive strength should be greater than 6 times greater than sigma c u otherwise there could be failure. Other could be there otherwise there could be failure. But normally this occurs because we have seen earlier that it could be 8 times easily. So, therefore, this occurs so, this is a prevent compressive failure this ratio must be maintained. This ratio must be maintained right. So, this ratio must be maintained. So, what we have seen so far is far seen so far that tensile strength enhancement may not be significant. Flexible strength enhancement is significant crack arrestration do occur and we get pseudo ductility all this properties enhancement we have seen. Let us see what are the type of matrices we use? Well high strength concrete normal strength concrete this is a matrix we can use but slightly you have to define the mix design differently. In fact, you can use microfiber engineered cement composite engineered cement composite which I am not discussing in a big way engineered cement composite. You can actually put in microfiber and you know the length small fibers actually an enhanced in a very high strength system people are thinking of adding nano fiber which might increase the strength of the nano level. So, tensile strength might in of the matrix might increase so significantly because nano crack it will be there as microfiber can arrest micro cracks. So, the fiber fiber you know high strength matrices very high strength matrices also with say polymer composite rebar together with very microfiber people are attempting to make composites which can be used for very high strength high end uses and so on so forth. Normal strength concrete we know and we can always use fiber enforcement for flexural strength improvement and pavement for example, where flexural strength improvement is a necessity we can use them. Places where I need flexural strength enhancement we can use this fiber composites you know fiber reinforced concrete in normal strength concrete. But mixed proportion of this one is different you just cannot make a normal strength concrete mix and put the fibers you will have all kind of trouble we will just look at that types of fiber that you get varieties of fiber you can get actually you know fibers of varieties of for example, S glass E glass types of glass alkaline resistance glass this is Kevler fortenane is a branded product, Aramide actually then carbon high strength boron carbon high modulus lower strength there can be varieties of fiber possible to be used in reinforced concrete reinforcement other than of course, steel polypropylene polyester. So, these are several of them polypropylene polyester they are being used today for shrinkage cracks and all because as see this is your steel high steel mild steel idealized chest and diagram is here mild steel idealized chest and diagram high ductility high ductility polypropylene high density polypropylene sorry high density polypropylene low density polypropylene and this is polyester then glass high modulus polyethylene there can be several types of fibers they can be used depending upon their properties. But you see the steel of course, gives you high modulus low modulus you have to you once you have understood the behavior therefore, you can think of how to use them which way the way they will benefit and so on so forth. So, you have looked into the fundamentals and properties of some of them what properties are important diameter fiber diameter density, diameter density modulus of elasticity tensile strength elongation coefficient of thermal expansion these are important properties and some of these properties are some materials are available in literature a part of it from taken from literature actually Hennon's book this data. So, E glass density modulus of elasticity you can see these are in GPA tensile strength you can see. So, for example, this has got a high modulus of carbon high modulus type carbon high strength type low modulus, but the strength is strength tensile strength is 2.8 GPA that is 2800 mega Pascal and so on so forth and Kebler 49 this is the kind of properties. Shape of the fiber can vary shape of the fiber can vary for example, you can have hooked crimped and variety is kind of cross section rectangular all kind of hooked fibers all kind of because bond strength is important because I said that frictional bond after sleep that occurs therefore, which I showed a diagram earlier so bond strength is very very important therefore, we can make all kind of fibers and use them right. Now, in the plastic state we normal fiber complete we have to test by only V B test, but that also you know V B test we test with V B test because its slump is it will not have very low slump. So, what is seen is that V B time 10 to increase with fiber content 10 to increase with fiber content depending upon L by D. Higher L by D V B time is you know V B time is least depending upon dip to this is depending upon L by D this is the highest L by D and this is the next and so on so forth. Now, what happens is V B time increases significantly for high L by D with small quantity of fiber increase. While this L by D can withstand quite a lot of fiber content to have a V B time small enough as one second supposing I say that one second is the time or 10 second is the time good enough for my V B time or 20 second is the time you find that this is attended much lower fiber content for higher L by D. So, L by D governs the V B time it is important to understand higher L by D means lower V B time also the spacing of the fiber aggregate because of the size of the aggregate. So, smaller size aggregate spacing of the fiber is better. So, M S A higher M S A spacing of the fiber is poor and you will have fiber spacing is non-interform in this case all fiber will try to bundle out and results in the kind of balling or formation of bird's nest. So, workability is a function of all this workability is a function of all this. So, you have M S A higher M S A again same sort of curve you see less percentage of fiber it can tolerate for good workability. Empirical formula for steel is given as that that the fiber content by mass or weight as a proportion of the matrix should be less than 600 1 minus A G divided by L by D. So, you have L by D higher the fiber content you can withstand is lower right and A G is the fraction of coarse aggregate in the system. So, higher the more the coarse aggregate in the system less is the fiber it will tolerate. So, you should have more mortar more mortar more paste. So, it requires more mortar and more paste plastic fibers reduces bleeding and prostiction in case cracks that we have seen durability durability depends upon type of fiber. Steel can corrode but low diameter to cover depth you know. So, because but low you know low depth but this is low corrosion is low as diameter to cover depth is small. We have very small diameter cover depth still is large very large and therefore, so plastic fibers are also inert they do not corrode. Steel fiber can corrode but fiber concrete does not show that much of corrosion. Unless it has cracked and got exposed it will not show that much of corrosion actually micro cracks will show that. But then you have a cover put a cover which is not fiber it will glass fiber shall be alkali resistance otherwise cement materials attack them. It should contain more paste about 70 percent mortar is a good thing in this one 30 percent aggregate. So, you see you require more paste and mortar and hence mixed proportion should be specific many many times people tend to do a mixed proportion for concrete to get strength and then put fiber this will not work. You have to have specific mixed proportioning for this purpose and we have then thus we have understood in nutshell the you know fiber concrete. Let us look at another concrete we have looked into self compacting concrete which is free flow. Now, look at the other concrete which is actually high slum. So, it has got very low consistency represented by no slum condition zero slum condition. This is called roller compacted concrete placed by asphalt paper in pavement and compacted by high density vibratory roller used in Arthur Rockville construction. So, in case of pavement you can put it by asphalt paper type of thing. In case of of course, mass concrete you have to carry it by truck non agitating truck generally and segregation of course, is an issue then but use finally compacted by vibratory roller. So, it has to be dry absolutely dry zero slum. Compaction of water content governs the strength. So, therefore, it is a compaction and the amount of water content you are treating it like soil. So, water cement ratio is not the issue here but compaction and water content is the issue. Shell be dry enough to support roller and wet enough to have uniform distribution of paste. So, that is the basic idea you have paste distribution well sufficient paste and well distribution of paste just waste wet enough to get maximum compaction and but it should be dry enough to support the roller. P B apparatus with load on top is what we use with the search as you used and it is you know MSA can be 75 to 100 mm for testing the workability will come to that a little bit. I can have MSA 75 to 100 mm for mass concrete 20 mm for pavement concrete which can be as strong as 30 MP or 30 40 MP you can get 30 MP is easily attainable in Indian scenario. It will have high fine content strength depend upon density you can get around 30 MP easily batching mixing cylinder strength 30 MP is not difficult if you use ACI method of mixed design batching and mixing you will same as that of normal concrete or mass concrete for mass concrete and then segregation problem is there if you are you know taking it by trap it is placed in layers of 20 to 30 centimeter and spread it you know it spread it with spread it is generally spread it with spread it spread it so cylindrical search charge could be of this kind for pavement concrete you know typical BV test and you put a search charge here. So, this is your search are here this are the search charge let me use red color this is this are the search are traditional search are you put to the BV test STM 1 1 1 7 0 gives you the idea. So, BV test with search charge that is idea and RCC requires no forms requires no conventional finishing therefore, big advantage less cement actually in this in you can you can you can design it for lower cement in fact. So, it is Proctor's compaction what go one is a strength and you can use STM D1557 selected combine aggregate proportion packing density is important here you pack the aggregate very well so that paste content is reduced. So, then you flyers around 25 to 30 percent easily you can use and must use you know and mass concrete obviously, you are going to use them because of heat of hydration. So, flyers flyers you use this kind of things. So, say other all specific cementitious material and then put them together and do a Proctor's compaction test by varying water content right. So, this is the Proctor's test specimen Proctor test strength and density relays there will be Proctor test actually Proctor test you will get here right Proctor test you get here the variation you get something like this moisture content versus density dry density you plot it like this moisture content choose the optimal moisture content 6 percent or 5 percent as per the methods as are there and then that will give you the maximum density. So, density versus strength relationship is like that density versus strength relationship is like that. So, 7-day strength dry density well it could be better for better concrete. So, therefore, what we have looked today we have looked into flexor of fiber strength concrete types of fibers that we can use and lastly roller compacted concrete. So, roller compacted concrete to end then just let me summarize the roller compacted concrete is a 0 slump concrete generally can be used or generally used in pavements as well as in mass concrete dams and it might turn out to be cheaper basically because you are doing it with the formwork cement content could be less and then same you know the equipment that you use you do not require special equipment same equipment that you use for pavement construction or for mass concrete construction you can use the same one. So, with this we conclude our discussion on fiber concrete and roller compacted concrete and let us say 5 thank you for hearing. === Lecture 39 Transcript === Welcome to module 9 lecture 6. The last lecture of this module and also the last lecture of the series concrete technology series and we shall be discussing about some more special concretes in this lecture and also talk about sustainability. Polymer concrete composite is the first one that we will look into. When we look into high volume flyers concrete, geopolymer concrete, heavy and light weight concrete and other concretes sustainability that is what we will look into. So, this is the sequence of things that we are going to look at. So it is in 1960s when you know the 50s 60s polymer development in polymer science and technology took place and in the meantime concrete science and technologies we are trying to enhance the strength of concrete. Now the strength of concrete is restricted by the you know is finally the water cement ratio that we have understood that it is the water cement ratio which governs the strength and therefore there is a inherent porosity, capillary porosity in the concrete system and therefore, strength could not have gone beyond 40 those days. So, the other alternative was alternative was remove the hydraulic cement altogether. Polymer science and technology had developed by that time therefore, why not you know remove the cement hydraulic cement binder altogether. This gives rise to polymer cement concrete composites actually polymer concrete composites. Out of this there are three of them one we call as polymer cement concrete polymer cement concrete polymer cement concrete then there is another one we call at polymer concrete. A third is a polymer impregnated concrete. So, this is polymer cement concrete cement concrete polymer concrete and polymer impregnated concrete impregnated concrete polymer impregnated concrete. Now you see in this one polymer cement concrete means your attempt is to remove the hydraulic binder. So, here this is actually we do not remove the full thing in fact we add some component as an admixture almost 5 percent 6 percent and then used together with the so part of the cement system in the part of the cement system we use the polymer material and PC is one where actually hydraulic binder is completely removed and polymer impregnated concrete is already an existing concrete where we impregnate with polymer. So, this is what it is polymer concrete composite first one is the polymer cement concrete. We just had about 5 6 percent hydraulic cement binder with water can be replaced partly by polymers to form polymer modified concrete motor concrete for repair purpose let x modify concrete. Rubber let x's are water use here mostly and this rubber let x's they are actually elastomars now I am sure most of you are familiar with what is a polymer polymer is a material which is actually produced from monomers reputation of the monomers. So, there are varieties of polymers like thermo plastics thermosets elastomars right the classes of materials. So, thermo plastics are the one which can be remolded after heating thermosets are one which cannot be remolded they are usually cross linked polymer system I do not have time to go into the details of this ones that could be form of some other course materials course that you might have done. Now, the elastomars is another class of material which is you know like which can be there can be thermoplastic elastomars, but this materials are another kind of polymers which are rubber like was we understand they have elastic recovery under low strain. So, elastomars are polymers which are elastic exhibits recovery under low strains. So, let x's are actually elastomars this ultra fine emulsions after coagulation and the material behaves like rubber. So, these are small particles one to five micron I suppose these are the kind of sizes very small size rubber let x spherical particle spherical spherical particle actually this is added to the cement concrete system and they behave like rubber and they get polymerized solidified polymerized when polymerization occurs the mass increases molecular mass increases and therefore, it solidifies and when it solidifies within the concrete system cement based cement system one to five micron means they will go into the interstitial of the cement and thereby they actually increase the strength of the so they act as filler then solidify reduced on porosity somewhat and therefore, they increase the strength. So, strength enhancement could be 1.5 times strength enhancement ratio as it is called the strength of same water cement ratio concrete. So, strength of the polymer modified concrete divided by strength of the same water cement ratio ordinary concrete non modified could be about 1.5 1.6 times so good concrete can be prepared with this but this is costly. So, therefore, remain as a repair material one can make them into flowable micro concrete been used extensively for repair work processing similar to ordinary concrete only one point because if you are trying to you see they come as pre pack materials they usually come as pre pack system manufacturer supply them as pre pack pre pack system. So, they give pre pack more you know kind of mortar for example, so everything is mixed you mix water and the material is made all the construction chemical companies who supply them they give you pre pack. But if you are making yourself then when you are doing this processing almost similar you must have some kind of anti forming agent anti forming agent anti forming because this fine particles very fine spherical particles the 10 to generate a lot of forms. So, you must have anti forming agent some plasticizers and other admixtures could be there but anti forming agent is very much required. So, one can actually use this raviolet excess prepare their own concrete also but then commercially pre pack materials are available and very useful in repair works because they can be free flowing they can be flowable. So, before self compacting concrete came this was very much flowable material and even after self compacting concrete has come this is used as an extensive repair material. Something like this so this is your material you can see the cement and the latex. So, they go inside the system and actually polymerizes. So, once they polymerize they will actually get inside and the cement hydrates cement will also hydration of cement. So, cement hydrates will be there this will also polymerize solidify and therefore, the bond they make it a better concrete. So, this is your polymer cement concrete this polymer cement concrete you have all kind of latex such as you know basically SBR styrene butadiene rubber SBR styrene butadiene rubber you know it is not easy for concrete technologist and cement I mean civil engineers to remember this polymeric name. So, but styrene butadiene rubber is SBR system is very popular SBR is very popular you can have a poxilate excess poxilate excess polyvinyl acetate PBLate excess you can have acrylic latex excess acrylic latex excess etcetera there are various kind of system. But this is very very popular butadiene is a rubber styrene butadiene rubber system. So, this is basically in a kind of latex excess which I reduce and they make the polymer concrete. So, this is one type the next type is polymer concrete polymer impregnated concrete. So, polymers impregnated concrete you have got hydroleic cement binder and this is impregnated with low viscosity monomer that is polymerize to form polymer impregnated concrete. Let me see if I have a diagram I will come back to this later on you know I will come back to this later on just let us look at this. So, this is your ordinary concrete this is your existing concrete and your pores these are the pores as I have shown the blank white spaces this is the pores. So, these are your pores originally they are the pores actually they are the pores they are the pores actually pores are available. So, what you do you actually impregnation means put the material your monomer with accelerator etcetera etcetera because polymerization would be through an accelerator or by radiation technique or by thermal technique. So, what you do you actually put some heating system. So, you just impregnation injection is under pressure impregnation is just putting it on top flooding it and then the impregnation will occur the polymer will get inside you know polymer will simply get inside and block the pores at the top and this is polymer impregnation concrete. So, polymer impregnation can be done from the top on a flat surface and obviously, the bottom pores are still remaining but the top pores are there. So, this is the process of polymer impregnation. So, you know originally you must have a good concrete low viscosity monomer that is actually impregnated into the concrete and then polymerize to form polymer impregnated concrete. Now, this polymerization can occur because of the radiation but that is a health hazard by thermal techniques thermal polymerization radiation polymerization or by using chemical polymerization which kind of a hardener system you know like if you are familiar with possibly error light you know which is of course, an epoxy there are various kind of glues two component glues or epoxy is one material which is very popular. Now, you have two component or three component. So, there is a there is a resin there is a hardener and may be an accelerator. So, one of them would be catalyst or another material which will finally, make it to polymerize right and there is acceleration accelerate this process. So, you can have monomer mixed up with those materials all together which will polymerize it and they get inside and then polymerize it. So, successfully used in bridge deck actually the concrete surface becomes impervious stronger durable and high abrasion resistance. You know the durability is very good strength improvement ratio can be as good as two in this kind of material when tested in laboratory cylinders right and successful use in bridge deck bearing core because bearing core what happens is they actually tend to you know get get actually damaged and distressed during because of abrasion of the wheels and so on. So, what you go to do after some years you have to put another bearing core. Now, if you go on putting in that manner the thickness would go on increasing and dead load will increase. Also the people what they thought they initially thought that they will replace the bearing core for a given after a given number of years not replace put another layer over a number of years replacing is very difficult. But, so it so happen the traffic increase significantly the automobile technology improved more automobile cheaper automobile automobile you know market actually increased and therefore, traffic increase in the system and when the traffic increase the bearing core actually gave off much idea. Therefore, you have to put in another bearing core the reputation the frequency of putting in bearing core increased. So, what you do you cannot put on go on putting weights after weights on top of it polymer impregnation actually did a very good job there because once you put that you are bearing core last much longer its abrasion resistance increase durability increase and therefore, it will also protect the inside structural element longer. So, this was polymer impregnated concrete methyl with acrylate epoxy many of those polymers they have been used for this purpose. So, that is what we showed earlier. Well polymer concrete is polymer concrete is simply polymer concrete is simply the polymer concrete is simply you replace hydraulic binder completely with polymeric material. So, epoxy concrete also used for repair material epoxy concrete use for repair material you know. So, you have a glue like for epoxy concrete for example, G Y to 50 or 230 these are the brands earlier available hardener glue and hardener H 2 Y 838 50 etcetera etcetera series and then the third component another. So, you will have this one you mix the monomer or resin with the hardener system and put sand into it. Now, just simple example you can take example of aural right aural right aural right aural right you take example of aural right it has got a glue and a hardener. Now, you put some sand together in this aural right it makes you an epoxy model. But only thing is the difficulty is that the mixing process the viscosity of the system stickiness of the system has to is such that it is not easy to make them. So, you have to have you know special kind of ones at the same time you may have to have a spray for example, might have a silicon spray as a demolding agent. So, normally not one would not be using them for regular concrete because it is so costly it is you know you can understand and small aural right tube cost you how much. Even today in Indian scenario even if the cement price is high 50 kilo would cost let us say 50 kilo cost even 500 rupees it is only 10, but today it is not 500 yet it is 10 rupees a kilo. But epoxy cost you aural right small tube cost you few grams cost you 110 rupees or 20 rupees 25 rupees 10 granders the cost is astronomical compared to concrete. So, this kind of concrete cannot replace our conventional concrete, but can actually do very well as far as repair is concerned. So, quick repair quick repair quick repair it will set within 24 hours. So, if you have a pre stressing you know let us say pre stressing anchor as just given when your system is system is all locked up unless you do the pre stressing in bridge keep can happen or similar kind of elements it can happen that if you do not do the pre stressing you cannot remove the support system. So, everything gets locked up and in such situation you want to quickly get the concrete repair. Depoxy can be a solution there because it will develop the strength within 24 hours you know curing time is relatively less, but extremely costly. Of course, you have jet cement today jet cement time mentioned earlier they can do the you know they can quickly set and all that. So, airport runway repairs particularly the during the what time could be such jet cement. Apoxy is costly so it is not used, but epoxy have similar kind of properties quickly epoxy concrete. You can have polyester concrete PMMA polymethylmethycrolate concrete all these concretes have been used the strengths are much higher because the capillary inherent capillary porosity business is not there, but cost being higher not used for conventional structural element only used for repair only used for repair only used for repair. So, these are your polymer cement concrete is there are polymer cement concrete system. Let us look at the new concrete called heavy concrete used for radiation shield. The major problem in a nuclear reactor is to attenuate the gamma rays and neutrons emerging from the core by means of biological shield you know this should provide a kind of shield for biological shield. So, you do not want gamma rays and neutrons must be going out this is overcome you have the cheapest way and most convenient material chosen is a heavy concrete. And what you doing this one you have heavy aggregate, amethy aggregate, barite aggregate the aggregates which are very strong. So, this is called heavy concrete quick introduction to this material essentially you have x ray photons photon energy etcetera etcetera the after attenuation you know the this is your thickness you know basically basically this should be your concrete. So, it when it passes through the material some object it has which has got a thickness a density and this atomic number the actually it will attenuate and if this radiation is allowable this is fine. So, heavy concrete is based on this principle either radiation that you get is I 0 that is incident radiation and e to the power minus mu x. So, this mu depends upon density thickness etcetera etcetera x is the x is the thickness mu depends upon amongst other things it depends upon density there are few other factors. So, therefore, heavy aggregate we use barite or hematite and their specific gravity say 4 to 5. So, this is the this is the concrete obviously, here the mixed proportioning is not quite different from the conventional concrete finally, it will be the water cement ratio and all other properties of the aggregate whichever go by the strength of concrete will be the same. So, heavy concrete are used for radiation shield lightweight concrete on the other hand we use for insulation purpose now you remember thermal conductivity thermal conductivity mainly depends on aggregate type and of course, the porosity of the aggregate and nature of force and obviously, moisture content moisture content effective right. Now, this means that the density it will depend upon density. So, thermal conductivity has become more important than ever before because of what you call energy efficient building design and so on. So, for operational energy consumption in condition building. So, thermal conductivity is very important insulation thermal insulation is very important from that point of view and the concrete thermal you know concrete that can provide this are actually lightweight concrete. So, lightweight concrete lightweight concrete how lightweight well essentially, because low porosity high means, lightweight. So, thermal conductivity depends on aggregate type of course, and the porosity aggregate is the one which conducts which has got the conductivity of its own, but the porosity is one which governs it and obviously, nature of the force also govern somewhat, but I think I am not interested in telling you about what is the kind of nature of the force and so on so forth. So, it depends upon conductivity of the solid and force and the solid conductivity will depend upon menorological composition of the aggregate. For example, quartz or quartzite has got very high thermal conductivity compared to other type of aggregate, compared to other type of aggregate. So, lightweight concrete will depend upon is basically, because of the porosity low porosity high means, high density high porosity means low density. Now, lightweight aggregates where the other kind of aggregates which is generally not available much in India, you have something called cinder concrete not a structural concrete, but cinder or over one bricks they will give you low density low density, good give you somewhat good thermal conductivity, but in India it is a erated concrete autoclave a erated concrete or foam concrete these are the ones which are used as lightweight concrete. So, you have got a erated concrete actually you know autoclave autoclave blocks, foam concrete. Now, this you know the foaming agent you have some sort of foaming agent aluminum powder or there is even organic foaming agents this is. So, you make foam and put it in the concrete or mortar that you make and you can make foam concrete. There are some agents which you can add in the concrete right to the beginning they will go into the concrete system and generate lot of foam or word system gases and this entrapped gases can give you a erated concrete. Now, this curing of this once you one can do autoclave. So, using fly ash fly ash sand one can use even reverse sand on those ones you know fly ash sand and parts cement one can actually then use autoclaving at high temperature blocks can be generated and that gives you you know fly ash or various kind of blocks and the concrete there. There are system you know even in formwork also you can produce actually the foaming agent autoclave I mean a erated concrete. So, this is these are used for particularly used for thermal and acoustic insulation particularly for thermal insulation particularly for thermal insulation also they serve as light weight so they can serve of course, you know by by the porosity at the front they can reduce down the provide you some kind of sound insulation sound insulation actually is functional mass of the wall larger mass more insulation, but absorption of property is the function of the surface. So, where if you have porous surface that absorbs more so light weight aggregate concrete also if you use the core in a sandwich panel sandwich you know you have 2 this is one this is another panel and you have a third third sandwich material here. So, that is a sandwich one so this is this is the one this material this material will take this you know load load let us say an inside material can be light weight material which will act as thermal insulation whole system can give you good acoustic insulation also because layered system gives you good acoustic insulation as well. So, this materials are used for such functional purpose and light weight aggregates are of course, not much popular in India because they are not available natural light weight aggregates are available elsewhere in the world, but you can have light weight aggregate generated from fly ash by sintering process. So, you can have synthetic light weight aggregate coming from sintering process and aerated concrete I have already mentioned a variety of another concrete is no finds concrete which is pervious concrete, but I will come to this just before let us say the thermal conductivity is a function of porosity in dry state and it is also a function of porosity in saturated. So, saturated case this is saturated this is dry this is the thermal conductivity. So, as the porosity increases thermal conductivity reduces significantly porosity increases now here is your a rated it concrete somewhere very small point 0 to what meter degree centigrade even in saturated condition they will be 0.4 or 0.5 while normal aggregates are here this is for concrete actually this is normal aggregate would be somewhere there 2.5 and saturated condition 4 etcetera with quartzite aggregate other aggregates might show you some of them. So, you see you can generate actually light weight concrete here, but even normal concrete their thermal conductivity are of this varieties orders are known to us saturated condition with moisture they give you higher concrete. The pervious concrete allows water to calculate through it no finds now you can actually have only the you have to also find out the strength is sufficient. So, no finds there will be voids in the system and inter connected voids in the system for water harvesting they could be a useful thing the pervious concrete could be useful for water water harvesting, but they can serve also as good insulation they can also serve as good insulation provided you are able to make them and put them in the right kind of place where you do not want moisture to calculate because if you put it in the rooftop the water percolates then is going to be no use, but they can also you know depending upon the situation. So, no finds concrete you leave voids basically you have system like this aggregate system and paste will go do not put in sufficient paste to fill in all of them or even if you put the you know it has to be controlled otherwise the cost would be high. So, one is to see that people are also trying with kind of polymeric balls or polymeric hollow aggregate system plastic aggregation so on there are several other attempts are being made to get actually lightweight concrete and these are all at those at those stage, but aerated concrete are reality and lightweight aggregate concrete also and in the world also reality the strength actually reduces down you cannot get very high strength concrete them because aggregate becomes a weak point. So, this is about lightweight concrete heavy weight concrete to right weight concrete recycle aggregate concrete using waste in concrete of variety is kind. For example, people are trying all kinds of waste that is available for other industries to use because sand is a problem availability of the fine sand as sand as core fine aggregate is a problem. On the other hand you have got huge quantity of pond ash bottom ash as fine aggregate you know this you can use as fine aggregate this huge quantity of pond ash available bottom ash available as fine aggregate alright pond ash available bottom ash available as and that you can use as fine aggregate, but one must design the mix characterize this material and design this mix one must characterize this material and design this mix some you know it is one can use them successfully does not problem bottom ash got there is another advantage if you are collecting directly from the thermal power plant they can actually give you good thermal insulation as well. However, this materials are to be seen and design because they are there are very component of spherical particle there and hollow phase spherical particle and generally they have load you know density is lower, but strength can be higher. So, therefore pond ash is bottom bottom ash has fine aggregate this pond ash is nothing but the ash bottom ash and fly ash mix together they are ponded for disposal purpose where variation they vary from point to point in the ash pond, but they can still be the sizes are similar to fine sand and therefore, one can use them. Discicult aggregate demolition waste constructed construction waste they have to be crushed and made make into a replicate these are in research state still are to be used, but these are possibilities people are attempting them one problem associated with this one is whenever you take the aggregate recycle aggregate crush them you will have a original mortar layer adhering to it the interface original interface remains. So, when you add now your mortar new mortar fresh mortar you know they would again form an interface interfacial transition so, original interface remains and people are trying to solve them. Now, you have to increase the strength so, therefore, there is a there one has to see limitation of the strength should be there good lot of research are going on to look into this material grade them first crush them get them graded get the packing density and obtain the system as it should be. So, this is the recycle aggregate lot of research being done on this right now. Another concrete is high volume flyers concrete percentage of flyers can be as high as 50 to 60 percent in this one of the cementitious material. So, you have 100 kg of cement or maybe you know you just have 100 kg of cement develop largely North America, Canada and United States 100 kg of cement maybe you have 100 kg of flyers or maybe more 120 kg of flyers. So, this is the material you use now whole idea also idea is to use you know also idea where you do not want where you do not want too much of strength wanted is not very large where you do not want large strength, but you want to use a lot of flyers then this material is after all flyers is a waste and you are saving on to the cement will come to that in a in short work and in such situation you know you can use this material very well, but how do you use this to get structural grade of concrete 20 30 MP 40 MP concrete concrete use super plasticizer to cut down on to your water use super plasticizer to cut down on to your water and use low water cement ratio, low water to cementitious ratio, low water to cementitious ratio. So, therefore, initial strength will be given by the cement. So, 0.32 for 60 percent flyers 0.45 for 50 percent flyers. So, use low water to cement ratio use a super plasticizer to get the workability. In fact, flyers can improve your flyers actually because of its spherical shape as we have seen earlier it actually water will acts like a somewhat like a water reducing agent it cut down so water demand. So, therefore, both flyers and when these are used judiciously normally we use low water cement ratio for high strength in normal concrete, but here I am using low water cement ratio super plasticized, but using large quantity of flyers. So, my strength may not go high, but it will be normal strength concrete, but large quantity of flyers I will be able to utilize low aldease strength because I am you know using flyers low aldease strength and then good long term strength and durability I will obtain. Well, the question of reinforcement if it is there then the issue of carbonation these are to be looked into. So, high volume flyers concrete has been a development largely it will give us you know it can make it to be a sustainable concrete because cement saving would be there. Then there is another concrete of the similar kind called geopolymer concrete. Now, this does not use cement at all that was high volume flyers, but no cement high flyers less cement, but now no cement fully flyers basically it is you know carbon and silicon belong to the same group same group in periodic table. Therefore, this silicon also shows polymerization tendency it can form bond with silicon to silicon S I O S I S I bond possible four like pole valences. So, this also you know it can show that similar properties as carbon. So, it can be polymerized limited extent. So, this is reaction of a aluminum silicon silicate with alkali poly silicate utilizes poly condensation of silicon and alumina and high alkali content for strength. So, basically poly condensation condensation reaction is a polymerization reaction where all the product they actually react leaving no by product to make a polymerize polymer. So, poly condensation reaction is that so everything goes into it in high alkali and then this is because of polymer solidifies and therefore, it gives you strength. So, basically initially plastic then polymerizes become solid and it can give you the strength. One problem has been curing temperature is 60 degree centigrade or so, so far as understood and therefore, but remember it does not use any cement altogether. A typical mixture of this geopolymer concrete would look like this 20 mm aggregate about 277 kg per meter cube of concrete. Core segregate 40 mm you know this is a second core segregate 370 kg and 7 mm 647 kg. So, you have actually 277 370 it will depend upon packing density 647 would make it something like 1200 you know. So, 14, 9, 1294 kg of core segregate 1294 kgs of core segregate fine aggregate is 554 say fine sand then use flyers low calcium because this is the binder now. So, this is 480 kg, 408 kg per meter cube this is the binder together with sodium silicate and sodium hydroxide you know 103 kg this is 41 kg. So, silicon to sodium oxide ratio should be equals to 2 actually the concentration is pretty high, pretty high you know it is reach. For example, this is 8M this was 14 millimetre 14 molar concentration this is 8M concentration this is 14 molar concentration. So, high concentration sodium silicate solution sodium hydroxide solution then use a super plasticizer to actually disperse the system and you might add extra water 22.5 kg etcetera etcetera per meter cube. So, this will have some water in the system itself plus this water. So, what you are using you are using flyers sodium silicate sodium hydroxide and of course, like concrete only that is knowledge like concrete only. And then you make this concrete 60 degree centigrade curing temperature curing temperature is 60 degree centigrade you know 60 degree centigrade is the cube temperature that is the only the problem that is the curing temperature is 60 degree centigrade 60 degree centigrade curing temperature and that is you know somewhere around that. that and that is actually the problem. Besides the problem of purity of this one, you know this molarity and this molarity such strong concentrated material pure material you have to use and therefore the cost is actually cost is high, cost is not yet it is not you know so more research is required, you require more research in this. But one successful it may actually do away with the cement, cement line base cement altogether. Well, there could be something new coming in magnesium base cement coming in the meantime and several other things are actually being worked on. Now, so far what we looked we looked into all the types of concrete where right is of concrete and remember we talked of so many types of concrete right in the beginning in the first lecture we said normal concrete high strength concrete and high strength and high performance concrete high strength matrices roller compacted concrete self compacting concrete and all lot of them we discussed actually. But one issue of concrete we got to look into called sustainability sustainability. It should sustain what is sustainability to use the resources currently available resources in such a manner that it does not affect the use by future generation. So, that is it use all materials energy everything in such a manner that it does not affect I am not going to formal definition of sustainability now in this last lecture. But because I have other things to talk about but this is a whole you know set of literature available on this issue. But it is relevant to a concrete very much and first thing in this issue is of course, the embodied energy. Seemant production uses energy also emits carbon dioxide because you are cal signing calcium carbonate. So, it emits actually carbon dioxide it use a some amount of energy. So, therefore, that energy which is used in cement production is called embodied energy it will include the transport of raw material you can go further down below there are other concepts such as x r g and so on are so many things I do not think we are going into this. But embodied energy is the energy that is gone into the materials from production up to the construction in our case. So, the energy used in production and transportation of the material is called embodied energy. So, this is therefore, cement aggregate may require if you are crushed aggregate may require some energy for production mining and then you know today in future surely mind only open cast mines as they are in many of the western countries. Quarry even if you are taking out from the query you are crushing it there is some energy going into it then transportation. So, therefore, similarly fine aggregate transportation as well as energy required in production they make the embodied energy and then OPC produces carbon dioxide and it is actually next to fossil fuel in production of carbon dioxide which is a greenhouse gas as you know what is the greenhouse gas a greenhouse gas is one like carbon dioxide methane etcetera etcetera whatever you know what is a greenhouse for example, if you have a glass house which you might have seen in these stations the glass allows long I mean short wave radiation to pass through it. So, it allows sunlight to come through it but does not allow long wave radiation to pass through it. So, it is transparent to short wave radiation effect to long wave radiation as a result in a green house temperature is maintained house high if there is sun radiation available. So, in cold countries is very important even in hill station in India the the plant rooms the where you have small plants in nurseries of green houses where actually the glass or some transparent material which allows short wave radiation on solar radiation to come in but opaque to terrestrial radiation which are long wave radiation. So, carbon dioxide layer formed on top of the atmosphere is almost acting like that and that is causing solar radiation to come in but getting trapped normally within a year whatever so radiation comes in from the sun it actually gets dissipated to the atmosphere in some manner or other by radiation back if a potential transport or not several so many mechanism you not going to this. But if the carbon dioxide is there it does not allow radiation to go back so it is strapping and that is causing global warming. So, this is a concern so cement is the next two fossil fuel in terms of this carbon dioxide production anthropogenic carbon dioxide 5 to 10 percent and therefore, it is very important to look into this and India of course, is the second largest producer of OPC and it is OPC only it is the OPC only so OPC after China and therefore, this issue is very important important for us and then if you look at this the volume of concrete to use because we have said concrete is a very you know economical and many other advantages are there. So, because of this volume of concrete uses very large the cement is the material used by mankind next to water water is maximum then use of the cement or concrete. So, part capita concrete consumption in the world is increasing also astronomically need not going to that details at the moment, but because of sheer volume of cement concrete is the major contributor to embodied energy most of the buildings, but it is also a major contributor to carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. So, that is why 5 to 10 percent so, hence contributes most to the carbon emission in the initial stages in its initial stages it actually contributes maximum to the carbon. So, therefore, concrete and green construction this is very very important so, it should see that how concrete reduces and one of the culprit is of course, the OPC clinker production and that is why this high volume flyers concrete came by geopolymer concrete is being looked into magnesium based cement is being looked into and several other issues are being looked into. Now, you know the major contributor to embodied energy is most building and as we said it is next to the OPC cement. Typically, if you see in buildings in a given building because of the quantity to the use machinery would be you know embodied energy gigajoules if I look at it typical in a building machinery will be there steel will be there although steel is power mid turn, metric turn power metric turn embodied energy produced by steel is much more plastics, but concrete being shear volume it is actually the largest producer of you know largest contributor to embodied energy is building. So, one issue is embodied energy the other is of course, the operational energy because after in buildings and of course, infrastructure embodied energy itself is good enough concrete is not going to add to the or save the operational energy in any manner. So, one must look at life cycle energy implications in all cases life cycle greenhouse gas contribution that is one should look into as far as concrete sustainability is concerned and contribution to natural resources depletion other than those used as fossil fuel because fossil fuel is already taken care of there right. So, for example, sand today in India sand you cannot get reverse in environmental problem you have created points, pits in the river changing the problem you know river by taking sand from the river you are actually disturbing the system of the river ecological and environmental system of the river. So, you cannot take sand from there. So, therefore, depletion of the natural resources this is already occurred, but we should not depleted more right now for the so that future generation gets more affected by various manners by not able to use the resource for themselves, but environmental concerns all put together. So, natural resource depletion is an issue similarly, co-segregate resources are you know they are not increasing they are decreasing. So, therefore, one has to keep that into mind. So, natural resource depletion is what one should see and that must be taken in. So, sustainability performance of concrete should take into all these issues and that is why you have high volume flyers geopolymer concrete magnesium, geopolymer concrete and magnesium based cements and these are being thought about. Minimization of cement consumption is very very important because durability it should be more durable maintenance free durable maintenance free. If you do more maintenance lot of cement again you are going to use where obviously, might contribute. If you are using polymers they are also again polymers also you know they will contribute to some kind of energy usage and so on. So, this issue has to be looked into and therefore, sustainability performance one one talks about concrete one must look into all these issues put together. And therefore, let me summarize this lectures all together one by one and I will take a few minutes in the summarization slide. We have looked into concrete from the last one we looked is that it is sustainable it can be sustainable. Now, how it can be sustainable? Minimize, minimize carbon emission carbon dioxide emission that is you know reduce the use of OPC clinker as they are produced now. How can you do it use of supplementary cementitious material? Surely use of high range water reducing agent because particularly supplementary cementitious material like fly ash which is actually otherwise a problem of storing from environmental concern they would create environmental disturbances. So, use this material in concrete even in structural grade of concrete if you have good structural grade of concrete if you are not using high volume fly ash concrete. So, that they should be used and so is a plus water reducing agent because water reducing agent can reduce the use of water and hence for same water cement ratio you can use less cement. It has got its implication on economy also attempt to use recycled aggregate lower you know recycled aggregate at the as much as possible or recycled material as much as possible at the moment coarse aggregate may be may not be very easy to use. But surely pond ash bottom ash and waste from let us say marble industry another industries if they are characterized properly and research properly they can also be used. So, the two make concrete sustainable these are the thing first is and also is thermal properties if you are using in building. So, one must look into because it can concrete can store energy it has got what is called thermal mass it can store energy. So, this issues are it looked into then radiation you know rejecting the radiation this depends upon what is called emissivity of the surface, non wave emissivity. So, the color and of course, now people are using nanotechnology as for example, titanium oxide co on concrete might produce or various kind of admixtures and so on a concrete which is self cleansing concrete and several other attempts are being made. So, these are trying to make concrete sustainable. So, this is the last one I looked into in the summarization but first of all all through over 42 hours of discussion what we have observed concrete is versatile. Why does the strength range from 5 MPa to 200 MPa maybe 800 MPa cement base composites. So, it is really versatile very versatile material it can show you can you can design it for strength as you want put fiber into it you can get right kind of ductility that you desire but if you do not get it tensile strength improvement is not as much you can obviously, use reinforced concrete of crystals concrete. But tensile strength also can be enhanced perhaps in future if you look at moldability, solar compacted concrete zero slump to self compacting concrete again is versatile very high range. The tensile strength and ductility of course, remains problem for normal concrete but then we do not use concrete as such in most of the cases we use it as a composite as reinforced concrete or we pre stress it either way obviously, providing reinforcement. It can provides robustness massivity a mass concrete dam you can make it concrete or of course, good old days could have been with mass nerdy but largely concrete provides that answer you cannot use most of the other material for example, you cannot use a plastic polymer to really make a robust gravity dam but concrete can provide you that. It is economical it is cheap and that is why it is use so much it is relatively durable it is relatively durable more durable then many materials and you can make it more durable. But many understanding are yet to be developed lot of things are still on empirical stage particularly with reference to this so, research are required and they are being done development has concrete has taken concrete to any heights in last one or two decades last decade last two decades of 20th century and following it up. So, therefore, it has actually given you real versatile material is available in terms of concrete and it can be made sustainable and there are of course, more kind of atoms are being to make it more and more sustainable. So, therefore, with this we can conclude the concrete is the versatile material and can be used and in this in discussions in our discussion right from the first to the last lecture we have tried to look into all those aspects of concrete. Thank you very much for bearing. === Lecture 40 Transcript === Okay, recording has started. Once again, I welcome you all to the firstization of the NCTL course, Comfort Technology. Let me introduce myself. I am Mila Kanmani-Makamaran, doctor's scholar of Framsible in the Department of IT Metas. I work in the area of substance with your construction materials. So, every week we will be meeting here to discuss some practice questions. So, that will help you to solve that same question. So, every week we will meet on Monday from 6 to 7 pm. I hope the timing is convincing to everyone. That will not last your regular class time. And then, let me share my screen. This is screen visible. Can anyone unmute and say? Yes, ma'am. Yes, ma'am. Thank you. Okay. Let's move to the practice questions. Moving to the question one. I request you not to unmute and see the answer as of now. We have some other options to solve the assignment. So, just be patient by like, extend the first question and then we have some other option subject you can give your answers. And not even in the chat box. Moving to the first question. Which of the following properties of cement is considered to be undissuated or disadvantaged? Which is disadvantage of the following properties. Okay. So, let me pose the question for you. Okay. I hope everyone can see my screen now. Can you see an option called activities at the bottom right corner of your screen called activities? Can anyone see my, everyone can see my screen I guess? Yes. Okay. Can you see an option that will be triangles, choir and circles? That is called activities. If you click that option, if you click that option, you can see breakout rooms, polls, question answer, recording and wide voting. Out of that you could, you should choose polls. You can see polls right. You can, is anyone not able to see the option polls? Yes ma'am. You could not see the option polls. Are you able to access the polls? So, the Rob, to the bottom corner of the right side, you can find the option called activities. If you click that, there are so many options out of that, is it choose polls? I think the new people are joining again. Let me explain, let me explain again. In the screen, you can see, on the bottom right corner of your screen, you can see activities. If you click that, there are many options out of the, you should choose polls. Okay. Let me talk, recent thing for a minute. You can, now I have given the question, I have launched one question and polls. You can give the answer. The question is, which of the following properties of cement is considered to be undecided or disadvantageous? There are four options, low life cycle cost, low ductility, moldability and robustness. Only four people have answered the question. And there are around 30 to 34 people in the meeting now. The question is very direct from the lecture. Let me explain again. There is an option called activities with the bottom right corner of your screen. You can choose that and then in that you can, you should choose polls and with polls, you should, there is one question. You can answer. So, at least 15% have given the answer. And now there are around 36 people in the class now. Okay. Let me increase my voice. There is an option called activities at the bottom right corner of your screen. You should choose that from activities, you should choose polls. From polls, you can find questions. Question one is, which of the following properties of cement is considered to be undecided? You can give your answer. Okay. Right now, 13 votes for load activity and three votes for low life cycle cost and four votes for robustness. Okay. Let's see what is the answer is. So, you can see my screen again. So, let me explain the options by what is seen by low life cycle cost. Low life cycle means overall production cost, maintenance cost, till its end use is comparatively low for concrete. So, that is a good advantage, right? Advantage is property and then moving to second option, concrete is poor ductility. Okay. So, and moving to the third option, it can be molded into any requisite. That is an advantage. That is an advantage and moving to robustness, it can tolerate adverse loading conditions. So, out of the four options, it is very direct that low ductility is a disadvantageous property. I want to un-mute your self. Sorry, mute your self, sorry. I request everyone to mute. Okay. Thank you. So, the answer is load activity. Does anyone has doubt on this question, you can unmute yourself and ask the question. Yes, ma'am, please repeat the question. Which of the following properties of cement is considered to be undesirable or disadvantages? So, most of you have selected load activity. So, I hope you got the answer. Does anyone has doubt in this question? Okay. Let me move to the second question. So, second question is which of the following abbreviation is used for direct action silitation? Again, let me launch this question and involve. The people have joined later, let me explain for you guys again. So, here in the bottom right corner of your screen, there is an option called Activative. If you click that, you can join. So, you can find the option called polls. If you choose polls, you can find the question. Okay. Someone has rived. Shivani, where do you have any query? I have launched second question. The question is which of the following abbreviation is used for direct action silicate? Please provide your answer. You can choose the option which you find is appropriate. The question is very direct. That means stop the poll by 813. The time is 611. So, usually we will denote chemical oxygen, cement chemistry by some rotation. So, by that we abbreviate each chemical like direct action silicate, direct action silicate. We will denote them in an abbreviated form. Someone has rived with hand. If you have any query, you can unmute yourself and ask. Someone has posted an answer in chat box. But you can use the polls option. If you have any difficulty, let me explain again. There is an option called Activities at the top. Sorry, bottom right corner or if you are using mobile, then you can use more options button there. You can find activities. If you click that, you can find the option called polls. In polls, there are two questions. I stopped the poll for first question. Question 2 is in line now. The question is which of the following abbreviation is used for direct action silicate? There are three options. C3S, C2S, C3A and C4A. Okay, let me stop the poll. Totally 17 votes for C2S and 2 votes for C3S and 3 votes for C3A. So, there are around 40 students in class, but only 22 people are voters. If you don't know how to use this poll, let me explain again. You can unmute yourself and explain what is your difficulty in accessing polls. Okay, let me see the answer. Let us see what is the answer for this question. Okay, so, as I said, there are some interesting notations for each oxides. For calcium oxides, CIO, we denote by C and then silicon dioxide, we denote by SAO. SAO is not by S and then aluminum oxides is not by A. And I N oxides is not by F and sulphate dioxide is not by S with a bar on the top. So calcium oxides is noted by C, silicon dioxide is denoted by C. aluminum oxides is noted by C and I N oxides by C, sulphate dioxide is noted by C. So, I hope it is a very easy question. So, the answer is C2S, direct action silicate. Most of you have selected direct action silicate. This time someone has just write a wrong answer, but now you will be clear. Okay, moving to the third question. The major constant of concrete responsible for the dimensional stability of concrete is there are four options. Cement aggregates, fly ash and chemical admixtures. Let me put the question polls. First everyone to not answer in chat, please wait. Let me put the question in polls. Now the question is available. You can find the question in polls. First people have joined now. Let me explain again. I will come you all to the course try to join by the by 16 from next class from next meeting. You can find an option called activities on the bottom right corner of your screen. And if you use mobile phone, there is some other options or more options. You can click that you can find poll. Sorry, you can find activities. If you click activities, you can find poll from polls. If you have questions, you can provide your answers. The question is the major constant of concrete responsible for the dimensional stability of concrete is someone is sharing the screen. The answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer is the answer 10 which provide written by this particular ingredient. So options are cement aggregate reagent chemical admitting so right now 10 oz 11 oz are cement. 10 oz for aggregate out of 46 today Out of 46 it will only give 26 plus answers. Let's wait for one more minute. If we'll wait a short segment and aggregate, let's trust competition, either it's very direct from the lecture and then coming to fly ash, it's a mineral red mixture which is used to cement replacement and then coming to the final option chemical red mixtures are used to enhance the specific property or performance of the fresh or hardened concrete. So out of this we know that aggregate constitutes about 60 to 100 percent of the concrete composition. So it needs to be in a task less strong such that it does not react and it is responsible for the dimensional stability of concrete. And there were like people have chosen cement as well as aggregate. So now you like when you know reacts with water, it forms the bond between aggregates like it is responsible for the bonding. Like if you put aggregate together in a container, if you compact, when you remove the mold, if you put if you take a mold and you put aggregate in and you compress or you use some force to compact them, if you remove the mold after giving some compressions to remove the mold, you can find that aggregates will not stay together, it will it will shatter like the shape will not be maintained. But if you put cement, water and then aggregate together the cement forms the bonding between the aggregates. So without cement there will be not be there will not be bonding but cement with water when it reacts is called hydration. There is some shrinkage in the is a cement paste, hardened cement paste. So if you use aggregate that will be reduced to certain extent and this is responsible for the damage of surface. If you have any query with this question, you can unmute yourself and ask the question. If you are not able to unmute, you can put the post the question in the chat box. Let me discuss the question in the chat box by the end of the session. Okay. Let me move to the question 4. This is a very direct question. The mineral structure is characterized with option, there are 4 options. Equal size danyons and equal size cation. Small size danyons bonded with large size cation. None of the above. I have already launched the question in poll. Let me repeat it again by the right bottom corner. There is an option called activities. If you click that you can find many options one of that is polls. From activities to polls, you can find the question. I can choose the right answer and this is a very direct question. Okay. And the negative charge ions and then cations are positive charge ions. So instrument which will be there. What is the characteristic of the cement mineral structure? That is what you need to answer. And it is very direct from the lecture too. Let me see how many people have answered. Okay. So, at least 22 people have answered. 7. 7. Equal size danyons and large size cation. 9. 9. Small size cation. Okay. Okay. Now more options. There are around 60 people on the class. I request everyone to use option polls. If you have any difficulty with using this, using polls, we can post it in sad like in Sino. Okay. Someone else, you can continue on giving your answers. There was an option. Cement paste will be the carousel. I have answered a question. Okay. Let me use the answer again. You are asking about question. Option. Like the question is very direct. It is a major ingredient of cement concrete which is responsible for the dimension stability. See, if you use only cement paste and if there is no aggregate, you can see most linkage. Because cement with water when it reacts, there will be reduction in the amount of. There will be reduction in the volume of high-ditch form compared to the ingredient. If there is cement plus water, the volume totally forms 100. The volume of the reaction products will not be 100. There will be some reduction in the volume of high-ditch form. This mainly because of the shrinkage. So, if I explained about shrinkage, fuel fuel can understand, fuel people can't. So, I think with time, I think the carousel proceeds. By the time you will know what is in the shrinkage and why there is reduction in the volume of high-ditch form. So, when cement reacts with water, there will be few addition products formed like CSH. And then calcium hydroxide, then etringate, monoselphate. So, eventually, when these hydrates are formed, there will be reduction in the volume of reaction products. In cement, you all know there are C3S, C2S, C3A, C4AF. All these are the components of cement. When these reacts with water, there will be different hydration products. So, when compared with the ingredients, cement with water, when you mix both together, if it makes around 100 as a volume, 100 units. And if you think that there will be equal, the volume of the reaction products should also be 100. CSH plus, Portland, IE plus, etringate and monoselphate. There are the four main hydration products. If you add together the volume of the reaction products, it should be 100. That is what we expect. If the input is 100, then output should be 100. But that is not the case in cement hydration. There is some reduction in the volume. So, that causes, so that that may be due to the possible shrinkage. So, that will be explained in the later part of the process. So, that is the reason why aggregators are used, so aggregates self with the dimension stability. If you have any query with whatever extent, you can post it in the chat box. Okay. Let me see the core again. There are total, there are 31 people have given their answers. Out of that, more of, more weightage for lots and millions water responses, which is more safe, that is the right answer. It is very direct from the lecture slide. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello. Excuse me. Yes. Sorry for the disturbance. It was a small disturbance here. You can ask, Rohit, come on right. Yes, from. You can ask, what is your query? I am about fourth question, ma'am. Yes. Ma'am, which is the correct answer? The correct answer is. It is explained. Explain, ma'am. Okay. So, in some ways, you can find both answers, so let's carry on. Like, carry on means, carry on plus CA, plus or not. It's a carry on. Hello. Yeah. Okay. CA plus is a carry on and then, and on like oxygen, sulfur or anion with minus thing on the top. Anion is a negative, stars die on, and carry on is a positive stars die on. So, mostly the anion size will be larger compared to the size of the carry on. In the cement mineral structure. It's a very direct answer. I can't explain actually just as it's characteristic. You know, cement color is greenish gray, so that is, if you see, you can directly get it. If you ask the reason, I can say because of the principle of ion oxygen, the color is greenish gray, but it is very direct. So, what are the elements in cement, you can ask, if you ask what will be the answer, calcium, oxygen, silicon, you can say that right. That is, it is a very direct answer. Last thing, stand on, bond with small space, get on. Okay, Ben. Thank you. Okay. Okay, let me, let me go to question five. Which of the following compound has a minimum heat of hydration? Okay, you should read the question properly, which of the following compound has a minimum heat of hydration? So, there are four options. Option is tri calcium silicate, option B is tri calcium silicate, option C is tri calcium aluminate, and option D is tetra calcium alumina ferrite. So, I have already launched the question and polls for the people who joined. Now, let me explain it again in the bottom right corner of your screen. There is an option called polls for the activities. If you click that activity, you can find polls. You can give your answer there. You can go to question five and you can answer in polls. So, let me explain the question in detail. As I explained before, if you add water to cement, there will be some process called hydration. That is what cement C3, we know that tri calcium silicate, di calcium silicate, and tri calcium aluminate, tetra calcium alumina ferrite. All these are components of cement, right? All these compounds react with water to give the reaction products, that is CSHPL, port calcium hydroxide, that is port and diet. It will get a lot of water to get it and monosalpate. So, if all these compounds react with water to give the reaction products, there will be some release of heat. It is an exothermic reaction. So, it is what I explained in the lecture. If there is heat of, if there is release of heat, which compound here releases minimum heat, that is the question. I think let me check the polls now. Let us see what answers you have given. Okay, two votes for tri calcium silicate, and the three votes for di calcium silicate, five votes for tri calcium aluminate, and six votes to tetra calcium alumina ferrite. So, more votes for di calcium silicate. There are on 60 people in the class, and only 20 people are voted. So, if I request everyone to give your answers, if you are not able to answer here, you can provide an answer in the chat box at least. So, let me share my screen and explain you how to use the polls. And it will be using this option for the following live sessions too. Hello, everyone can see my screen now. So, here in the bottom right, you can find activity, right? There are triangle, one square and circle. If you click that, there are four options. Breakout rooms, vote and polls is second option. If you click that, you can find few questions. Let me delete the old. Okay, I can do that. You can find five questions as per now. You can answer for the five first question now. So, the question is which of the poll and compound as the minimum heat of hydration? If people are rising their hands, if you have some query, please post it in the chat box. Okay, someone has knocked in the di calcium silicate and one has given secret. Let me let us see what is the answer for the question. So, this is the total amount of heat generated by the when or when 100% reaction is over. When cement is completely reacted with water, so give this will be the amount of heat generated from each phase. If 100% tri calcium silicate from cement has reacted this much amount, 502. 502 joules per gram of energy will be released. If per gram tri calcium silicate reacts 100%, it will generate 502 joules of heat. But with di calcium silicate, if it is one gram of di calcium silicate reacts, it will be 260 joules of heat. Similarly, with tri calcium element 867 joules per gram will be generated and tetrah calcium alumina ferrite, already 19 joules per gram will be generated. They are available from the lectures and the right option is di calcium silicate. I hope everyone got the answer. If you have some query, you can post in the chat box and most of the people have to select di calcium silicate. And let me move to the next question. Question 6 is, line saturation factor is used as a quality control parameter in cement manufacturing process. And L is greater than 100 indicators. There are 4 options. Let me ask the question and pause. Let me see, I request everyone to give your answer in the poll. The main thing, let me explain the question. So line saturation factor, you generally use a quality control parameter along with the silicate ratio, the polymer ratio are also used and the main factor uses line saturation factor. Like by the end, when cement is manufactured, like after it comes out of the link, it will be burnt around 1000 degree celsius in the clean and after that it will move to the cooling area. In the cooling area, the clinker will be cooled down from 1000 degree celsius to normal temperature. And after that it is sent to grinding along with gypsum. In the time, they will check the chemical composition of the clinker and they will check for line saturation factor. If line saturation factor is greater than 100, what does that mean? If the line saturation factor is greater than 100, what does that indicate? That is the question and there are 4 options. Cement quality is good, presence of free, lime and cement, cement has better soundness and none of the above. You have gone through the lectures, it will be very easy to answer. And let me see what answers we have given in the poll. 3 Oats for cement quality is good and 18 Oats for presence of free, lime and cement. And 2 Oats for cement has better soundness and 1 Oats for coffee above. Let me ask a question again. If you could not use the poll's option, you can give the answer in chat box. I request everyone to use polls. If you click Activities option from the bottom right corner of your screen, you can find more options. If you come to polls, you can find 6 questions out of that question 6 is lime now. Question 6 is lime saturation factor is used as quality control parameter, cement, manufacturing process, lime saturation factor greater than 100 indicates. Let me open chat box now. So, I am going to give an option B. Option B means presence of free, lime and cement. Option B is the right answer. The presence of free, lime and cement usually the lime saturation factor will be in the range of 98% because it will not be even 100%. It should be less than 100 and usually it will be in the range of 98 to 99. Option B is right. So, which means like someone has answered 95 to 98. The maximum limit will be around 98. The lime saturation factor value will not be more than 98 or 99, which indicates the presence of free, lime. If there are more free, lime, cement will not be sound. If the lime is free, lime is more than the cement will not be sound. If it is not, there will be more expansion and if we can even find a fluorescence sometimes, we will do soundless test. If you are in your BE program, obviously have done cement soundless test in your second or third year of your concrete laboratory. So, we will prepare some small cylinders and there will be some hangar. We will put that cement cylinder with a set of inside water and for some 18 hours and later we will put it in an autoclave chamber and we will check for the difference in the expansion. If it is within 1 to 10 mm, it is fine. If it is more than 10 mm, then the cement is not sound. So, lime saturation factor indicates the presence of free, lime. Okay, let me stop the poll. If you have some questions regarding the course, you can post in the chat book. Let me try to answer. So, now I have taken six questions for the practice assignment. It is over. If you have any question of the six questions, you can ask. And I have an assignment. Yes. I have a question about the assignments. It is about the live assignment in the course. I can't say the answer and I can explain you the issue. How to make the assignments? What is the process from where we make assignments? I couldn't get any explain again. I mean to say that from which material we will write the assignments. You have no questions. All the questions are live. Okay, but will we write this is about assignment? You can choose the option. You can directly choose the option there. It is a multiple choice question. Similar to the questions I have practiced assignment, you can choose the right option and you can press submit. Once you have pressed submit, it will be taken for evaluation. You can try number of times to change the answer until the last date. Okay, remember there is a link provided. Sorry. Is the link available on this side? Yes. For the assignments. If you go to the NPTEL course, if you go to the concrete technology course, there you can find the course option. From there you can choose the same for the beat one. Did you see the big one videos? Lecture 123 videos. Remember to sing and please feel. Did you watch the lecture 123 videos? I was the lecture first, but I will not watch the videos. Lecture first, I will watch. Okay, go and watch the video. Okay, man. If you go to the, it is very simple. In beat one, it will be listed. Like beat one, lecture 123 video along with that there are someone has posted the link for course. Arjun Darshan, thank you. With that link, you can see the beat one content. Now, beat two content is also live. There are three videos for beat one, lecture 123. Lecture one deals with cement production and the position. Two deals with cement structure and hydration and lecture 123 is also the same cement structure and hydration. So, and below that there is one more option called slide lecture slides and below that you can find the link for beat one assignment. And in announcement tab also, if you, there is a link for beat one assignment, I guess. From announcement tab as well as search course content tab, you can find the link for beat one assignment. It is a multiple, multiple choice question options. You can see the right option. They can press summit and you can submit your assignments the end time class day of the until the last day that is given. I think probably this is the last day to submit your assignments. If I am wrong, then last it is 999. 9 times. Okay, next week when it's day. Until we can answer end time. Okay, moving to the course. If you have any questions regarding the course within the first three lectures, the course you can post the questions in the chat box. Okay, someone has course please at least to sign. I don't need to go into the moment that I'm in thank you and which book you recommend for concrete technology for the years. There are a number of books. So, I could not recommend any books for you particularly here. But there are few reference books given in this particular course. Gel porosity someone has posted a question. Yeah, usually it's around 28 percent gel porosity. As I said, one cement reacts with portal. There are four reaction products there. Let me type in the chat box. There are C.S.H. Gel. Gel. And then Portlandite. These are the hydration products once cement reacts with water. So, out of this, the C.S.H. Gel has some inbuilt porosity within within structure. That gel porosity is about 28 percent. Okay. Someone has asked cement to sand ratio for testing of water fumes for strength. Usually it's one is to three sand at it. You can find it in the code. I could not exactly remember the code name. Let me if someone knows they can put them in the chat box. Or let me put the IS code for the mortar cube stand in the next week. Yeah. If anyone has some other doubt, we can post in the chat box and admit yourself and ask the question. And if you have any clarification regarding the six questions, what I used for the practice of cement today, you can ask your question and clarify yourself. If you have any conceptual doubts regarding the course content, also you can post it in the chat box and admit yourself and ask. And I request you to join the section by six p.m. at least so that it will be difficult for you to answer the questions from both. If you join from the initial, I'm going to join now. I request you to join the live session by six p.m. at least by six five p.m. five six five. Because I'll start the poll for all the questions so that you'll miss some one or two questions. So that is the request from my side. And then from next till the course ends, every Monday we'll need from six to seven p.m. So this is a regular time. And then if you have any questions regarding the course content, also you can ask if I know, I'll answer directly or I'll answer the questions on the next week. Most of you will try to answer the questions in the Vini ask, but if I am not sure about the answer, I'll answer in the next week. Initially, someone said my voice is not audible. Similarly, do you have any other difficulties while you are in the session? Do you have any difficulties from I said you can't understand or if any to improve something. Do you have any feedback also can unbead or self-unsee? No ma no queries. Thank you all good. Because my first session is you have some difficulties that we corrected from I said so that we all are benefited from this session. Most of the will be dealing with and solving the practice assignment. If you have any conceptual doubts also, I can answer. Okay ma. Riya, as much as turn on your video, do you have any query? Excuse me ma. Yes. Every Monday session will be there like this. Yes, sure. Okay ma. But like for example, I have joined two or three courses in NPTEL. How will I come to know like the session will be on which topic on which course? Like I couldn't get what I think. It's okay ma ma. I will repeat. I'm asking. For example, I have joined two or three course. How will I come to know on Monday which course? Which course? Which course assignment practice is going to be held? Okay, you can find the details about life sessions on the announcement tab of the course. Each course is an announcement tab right? Mom will simply get a mail. The session will be held and will get a link. So that's why I got confused like which course this practice assignment will be held on Monday. In the main, did not mention which course? No. Okay. Okay. Let me let me fund me this difficulty to Rp. Yes mom. In that way we will have an idea like on Monday which course practice assignment is going to be held. I will convey this to Rp. 2R team. Okay. Thank you so much. Thank you. Hello, ma'am. Our course exam is conducted in MCQ based or subjective based questions. I'm not sure because I'm not taking an Imperial course here before. So like if anyone has attended before, you can unmute yourself and say and get a rule. Medical choice. Okay. I'm MCQ type. Okay. Then exam is also in situ type, right? Yes ma'am. Some other courses even have Philips. Like if you have some problematic, I know a similar person has Philips. There will be Philips. Like if the answer is what similarly what is the gel for of such gel? Yeah, it depends upon the subject. You can type 28. If you are subject to subject, you can enter 28. So you will get the only if it's number, there will be options to fill. It can be Philips also. Okay. Mom, one more doubt I had. It will be online or offline. Like NPE exams. Somewhere I heard it will be offline also sometimes. So I wanted to confirm this. Okay. I'll answer this question next week. Most of it online. Let me ask. Actually there are centers. Okay. In which the exams are in? The exams are held in centers. In centers. Okay. Okay. In the center, it's online or offline? Memofline. Okay. Anyway, today I could not answer these questions because I'm not exactly from NPTEL team. I'm just a call up from IIT Madras. Let me clearly answer this question next week. Okay. Sorry. Not answering out. Before coming to the practice assignment sessions at this live session, I request everyone to watch the. If in this week, I have expected everyone to watch at least week one content in the next week. I request everyone to watch week two content and come for the practice session assignment. Yes, Phil. Yes, Phil. Thank you. Mem, can we get a more practice in a practice seat? Sorry. Hello. Hello. Hello. Yeah, yeah. Some audible? Yeah, you're wrong. Mem, my dad is that can we get us some practice seat? I could not do properly. Can we get more question for practice? Yeah, from next week, let me add more questions. I was not sure I'll be able to answer more questions. I think I can add up to 10 questions from next week. I'll add 10 to 15 questions. Possibly, let's answer more questions or we can keep it to 10. Hello, ma'am. Hello. Is the exam registration for me is available? Yes, it's unclear available. How do I get that form? In the course website, if you go from NPT, if you go to the course, then you can find the option that you'll be able to answer. So, the course for the course, option that you'll be able to answer. So, for the exam, on the top left corner, I hope so. You can find the interest for the examination. In the online site, is it? Yeah, yeah, online site. I can ptl website. And I see her class in soy map. Soy map, is it the ding? Yes. Sorry, come again. I heard class in soy map. Soy map. Okay, soy map, right? Is there a link in that app? For example, I have never used app for that. I'm not sure whether you can register the exam for soy map, but it's easy to register. That's what I know. If someone answered the class, no, how to register the soy map, you can answer this question. No, no, soy map. I only know about the exam registration started or not. It started this. It started. Okay, okay, ma'am. The last date, which is the last date? The answer is written in the announcement tab. Okay, okay. Announcement tab. Okay. Okay, ma'am. Okay, some people have posted a question. Let me answer it. I'm not sure if it's very good right now. Okay, some from practical, no theoretical. Someone has posted a question. 28% from practical. No theoretical. Then, ma'am, please provide some example problems related to property. Okay, from next week, let me try to solve one problem regarding for property. Then someone has posted a code for cement test. Thank you. And then, ma'am, can you provide notes of the lecture? It's already available in the core subset. In polite chemical name, yeah, this like now we call them in a chemical name, like like calcium silicate or tri calcium silicate before they are called in their a neurological names of cement, be like me. See to this similar chemical similar structure to be like so we call it as be like. But be like of C3 is called as a like. We don't call, we call them as tri calcium silicate or di calcium. No technical issues. And then ma'am, into of you, ma'am, this is called from IIT Madras. Right now, I'm doing my PhD. Okay. Offline, offline. Excuse me, ma'am. Yeah, yes, Patima. I had a doubt, like for example, the exam date I checked on the course exam is going to be held on April for this course, concrete technology. For example, I'm not able to give the exam on that day because of my other exam schedule of my degree, like of my BTEC. Like the exam date will be postponed. I'm not for this question. Okay, exam date. Like for example, I will see the. I don't know anything technically from NPTEL, like how to register for your course or. Whether the exam date can be changed, I'm not so sure about that. Post phone in the sense, I'm asking, can I give it like some another day? Maybe I won't be able to give on that particular date because of my other exams. That's what I'm asking. Okay, we can post questions in the ask a question. There is an option called ask a question right in your course website, NPTEL course website. Okay, ma'am, I'll check it. Yeah, I can post anywhere. Like this question is totally only technical queries. If you have anything regarding the course and if you're able to answer, I'll answer that. Or else I will be doing, we'll be solving only the practice assignment. Okay, now the session ends. Thank you, everyone. First joint and if you have any queries, you can ask in the next class. Thank you. Thank you, ma'am. I request everyone to join by a mix class. Thank you. Thank you, ma'am. Yeah. Thank you, ma'am. Thank you, ma'am. Thank you all. Thank you, ma'am, for this session. It was wonderful, no? Thank you. Ma'am, I am audible. Yeah, you're audible. Okay, ma'am, I'll ask this question. Thank you, ma'am. Thank you all. Ma'am, are you from civil branch? Yeah, I'm from civil department. Okay, ma'am. From IIT Madras, you're seeing. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay, ma'am. Ma'am, I heard from my elders that IIT is very tough. Is it? === Lecture 41 Transcript === I will come here once again, let me explain you how to answer in course. I hope most of you would know how to get your answers in course. Okay, how thisization function is set? We will have some practice questions which will be from your week 3 content most probably and then I will post the questions. I first share my screen and I will show the questions and I will explain the questions. Then I will put the questions in full and you can give your answers from there. So how to ask is to pause? It's that, let me share my screen first. So I hope my screen is visible to you now. So here everyone can see the option called activities right. To the bottom right corner of your screen there is an option called activities. If you click that there are more options out of that you need to choose both in full and post questions you can give your answers. Still I have not launched the questions, let me launch question one. So you can give your answers but let me, you can wait for some time, let me explain the question then you can post the question then you can give your answers. Okay, let me share my screen again. I hope my screen is visible to everyone. Is it? Is my screen visible to everyone? Yes ma'am. Okay. That's fine. Okay. Yes ma'am. I hope you have a pen paper calculator because we have one sum today. So let me try to finish this session one last time it took around 1 and a half hour. Okay. Now to the practice questions. Moving to question one this is from V2 content but I could not post this question as to due to some time constraints. Okay. Here is question one. If the mean CSI's is 8 mm what particle size was what size particles will be considered as flaky. This question is direct from your lectures but you need to just calculate it that's it. So I already posted the question in polls. If the mean see if size is 8 mm what particles what size particles will be considered as flaky. There are four options. Having thickness less than 4.8 mm more than 4.8 mm more than 14.4 mm and then less than 14.4 mm. Okay. Here is a question if the mean okay more people are joining now. Let me explain. I have posted one question in polls. Here is the first question. If the mean CSI's is 8 mm what particles will be considered as flaky. There are four options and I have posted the question in polls. How does this poll is that. And to the bottom right corner of your screen there is an option called activities. If you click that there are more options like breakout rooms polls Q&A recording by polling in that you need to click polls in polls. I have already posted the question. Okay. Only seven people are given their answer. There are 40 people in the group now. Let me stop the polling by 6th 13. Does anyone have difficulty to access polls. Okay. So hall icon and Magin Rasharma have raised their hands. Any.ress? Okay. That's not clear 911 now. something better sir. Okay just a moment. Now it's my voice. Okay. Does everyone have issues with my voice? No, I'm getting your wife. Clear. Okay. Thank you. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Okay. It's fine. Okay. More people are joining now again. Okay. I have already posted one question in polls here in the bottom right corner of screen. There is an option called polls to the bottom right of sorry to the bottom right corner of screen. The option called activities with activities you can find more options in that you need to click polls in polls. I've already launched one question. Again give your answers. Around 50 people in the class now and only 16 people have given their answers. I need more people to answer. Are. Okay. Okay. Okay. Do you have any issue? No ma'am. Okay, you are rising your hand, that's why I just asked you. No ma'am. Okay, fine. Okay, I have already more time has skipped. So let's see what is the answer for this question. One. So. Here is the question and let's move to the solution. So. Actually code restricts the user both flaky as a elongated aggregate and. Particle is said to be flaky if it's thickness is less than 0.6 times the mean C6. So here we have given that the mean P6 is 8 mm. So if we multiply by 0.6 into 8 mm then we will get 4.8 mm. So if the thickness is less than 4.8 mm then it's considered to be flaky. So most of the people have given option A on the option is the right answer. I hope you everyone got it right and it's very simple and let's move to the question 2 now. Okay, now I started the questions from we three content. Let's see here's the question to which among the following generally has the highest packing density. There are four options, single size particle binary mixture, multi size mixture and all having the same particle density. Okay, let me pose the question in post such that you can give your answers. I'll I'll end the poll for question one. And I'm launching question two. Here is question two which among the following generally has the highest packing density. There are four options single size binary multi size and all have the same packing density. Okay. Does anyone have difficulty in giving a answers from polls? Okay, let me open the chat box for some time. Okay, some people are giving a answer in chat box. You can give a answer in polls. Yeah, where we will do the answer in polls. Okay, let me explain it again. So to the bottom right corner of your screen, there is an option called activities. Can you find here activities? Triangle, square, circle. If you click that, there will be more options. Okay, out of that you need to choose polls. If you choose polls, you can find questions. Are you able to access around 24 people has given your answer. Half of the class has given your answer. 50% people find it difficult to access polls. I'm giving from mobile so I don't see where. You want to find activities? No, I don't see. Can you find the more options with three dots like this? Yes, man. Some will have options in your mobile screen. No, mom, here only have a message. And turn on caption report, problem and report abuse. These are the options. Someone using mobile or able to access polls. Yes, yes, yes. Okay, anyone, anyone. I will ask you to go in the. Okay, bugging the process. Okay, rest of them please. Click on three dots just on the right side. In call progress, you can click. There he can submit his answer. Okay, you got it. He's saying there are three dots. If you click that, you can find the option. Okay, that's saying we need update. You need update that I request everyone to mute. Okay, thank you. Okay, if if in case today you're not able to access, you can give your answers in chat box. Around 30 people have given your answer. Okay, let's see the solution. Okay, so let's see. Okay, I think the picture is very clear. So which among the following generally has the highest packing density. I've given single size particle multi size part mixture. I have skipped the binary part. Okay, so if it is a single size, single size particle, then there will be more voids in between depending upon the packing arrangement. The void ratio might vary, but there will be voids in between the particles. So this small portion will be left as void, but if we add a particle, which is smaller than the size of this particle, talk about this small void. See, if you add, just leave out this very small particle. Just consider size one and size two. Okay, so if we have these, it will be like binary thing. Still we have some void. Okay, so if we add the some more particle, which is even smaller than size two, then it will be size three. So it can fill the void. So if we add very finer particle to this, if we able to fill all these voids, then the passing density will be maximum. Okay, so multi size mixture will have the highest packing density. Such that the voids in between the larger aggregates will be filled by smaller one. The smallest one will fill the last void. Ultimately, we can't arrive to the point called zero, but we will arrive to that point. Okay, so the answer is multi size mixture. Okay, so does anyone have doubts from question one or question two? Okay, I hope everyone, I think both the questions are simple. And you guys are able to follow. So let's move to question three. Question three is little bit complicated, but if you followed the lectures, it will be very easy to, very easy for you guys to answer. So similar kind of question is in your assignment as well, current assignment. Okay, here is the question. A small quantity of fine aggregate one is added to course aggregate two. Keeping the packing of aggregate to undisturbed is the proportion of course aggregate two. Is assumed to be by and the void ratio of course aggregate be E2. Then the void ratio of the sitting mixture is given by the expression. So we have to answer if you know the answer we can give all else will try solving this. The revision, okay, kind of a small derivation. Sorry, I'll go to let me launch this question in polls. If you guys are able to solve this question because sir as derived both. See in this question, we are assuming small quantity of fine aggregate is added to course aggregate. Sir, I have solved for both the small quantity of course aggregate is added to fine aggregate. Or if a small quantity of fine aggregate is added to course aggregate. For both these cases are as derived the expression simply that we have changed the terms here that is it. So if you already knew the answer you can give your answers or else we will see how to solve you know you need not worry, okay. Let's see the solution because it will take time to solve this expression. Okay. So they have mentioned as a small quantity of fine aggregate one is added to course aggregate two. So this is the course aggregate, okay. So already they are clear, right. This is the course aggregate and we are adding some fine aggregate, some small quantity of fine aggregate. This is a red dot. Yeah, the point. So these large blue circles are the course aggregate and the small red ones are the fine aggregate. We are adding very less proportions such that it occupies the voids in between the course aggregate. So if V is the total volume, okay. If V is the total volume, I will read it. Okay, if this is the total volume, okay. Sorry for this line, I could not draw it straight. Okay, this is the total volume V. So if the added fine aggregate occupies the volume, volume in between the course aggregates, then the bulk volume will not change, right. So the bulk volume remains the same, that's not changed. So the solid, so the total volume bulk volume is V and then let's assume what is the solid volume. See here we have voids also, right. And they have said that the packing of the aggregate remains undisturbed. So it just occupies the space in between the voids. So we have total bulk volume as well as solid volume of course aggregate V, sorry, of the course aggregate to. So we say that the solid volume of the course aggregate is nothing but V2F. And whatever a finite rate we add, it just occupies space in between. So we say that the volume of fine aggregate is nothing but V1, which is nothing but the solid volume. Okay, so they have given the proportion of the course aggregate to is assumed to be by. So the proportion of course aggregate by is equal to the solid proportion of the course aggregate to the total volume. Total volume is nothing but V, total volume of like we are assuming the solid proportion of course aggregate to to the solid proportion. V2 is nothing but the solid proportion of course aggregate to and divided by the total solid volume. Which is nothing but the solid volume from aggregate to course aggregate to and solid volume from course aggregate to that is fine aggregate one. So it is nothing but V2 is divided by V2 is plus V1. And we all knew that what is void ratio? We void ratio is nothing but the volume of voids to the volume of voids to the volume of solids. And if we solve this, we will get this term. If someone is not able to follow, we can unmute yourself and ask question, but it is already solved in the lecture slides. So and so as I have at this form, the void ratio of course aggregate is nothing but V2 is equal to total volume written by the solid volume of aggregate to minus 1. Okay, so from here, so this is these are the terms we have written here. And we will see the what is the void ratio of the new mixture formed. That is a small quantity of fine aggregate is added to the course aggregate. So we will see what is changing here. So the void ratio of the new mixture E of y is equal to total volume divided by the solid volume. Here the total volume does not change, right? The bulk volume does not change, which remains to be V and divided by the solid volume. So here in this slide for to calculate the void ratio of course aggregate to I divided it only by the solid volume of 2 course aggregate to. But in this case, we are adding both the solid volume of 1 as well as 2. Okay, because we are calculating for the whole mixture, including this small aggregate, including this fine aggregate. So here this is a formula where I have just substitute the terms. And then here what I am doing is I am multiplying and dividing this term by V2 is that is solid volume of course aggregate to. So it so from here what I am seeing is so this term we all knew this what is this term actually. This is nothing but proportion of solid volume of course aggregate to the total solid volume which is nothing but y. Okay, we have in the see which is that V2 is by the total solid volume is nothing but y. So we replace this term by this expression by term y. And then again I am just subtracting and adding y. So the total so the sum will not change. So in this term I am taking y as common such that we will get V by V2 is minus 1. So you all know that V total volume divided by solid volume of course aggregate to minus which is nothing but the void ratio of course aggregate to. Which is nothing but E2. So this term remains the same and from here if we take y as common we will get 1 plus E2 minus 1. Okay, does someone then get or then to understand what I am saying. If you did not understand you can unmute yourself and ask. It is just solving and so I already solved this problem. I hope everyone has watched the lecture. Okay, so the answer is nothing but option one and I could see more people have given answer. Given option A as answer. Let's see what answers you guys have given. Yeah, 21 votes for option one. Okay, let's find everyone out in or watching the lectures and answering correct. Let me launch question. Okay, let me explain the question for now. Does anyone have any doubt as of now or is guys able to follow the class. Okay, yes, madam. Okay, this question three understandable or someone is not able to follow. Okay, if you have any query we can post if you are not able to unmute yourself we can post it in. In the chat box, let me see after sometime. Okay, let me first explain person for there are two statements here statement A is shape of the aggregate and packing arrangement determines the void ratio. Thereby it determines the pace content required to fill the void. This is statement D and statement B is aggregate texture is responsible for its bond with cement paste. This is statement B. So you need to find which statements are correct and which statements are wrong or if both statement are correct or both statement are wrong. This is option A. A is correct and B is wrong option B is A is wrong but B is correct and option C is both a and B are correct and option D says both a and B are wrong. If you went through the lecture and if you understand what does the shape of the aggregate does with the packing or how does it affect or it does to the effect you can you'll be able to say statement A is correct or wrong and statement B says that aggregate texture is responsible for the bond with the cement paste. If it is so you can say you can choose all these options. I hope you can give your answers and polls. Okay, already people have started answering for question four. This question four is understandable. Someone is not able to follow. We can unmute yourself and ask. And to the people who joined very late, let me explain it again. So the bottom right corner of your screen, there is an option called activities. Okay, if you click that option, we can find more. Can find more options here like breakout rooms, polls in that you should choose polls and you can find the questions. Okay, let me in the polls for questions. Here you can find already three questions. I've ended the poll and question for us live now. That is there are two statements shape of the aggregate and packing arrangement determines the void ratio and thereby it affects the pace content required to fill the voice and statement B is aggregate texture is responsible for it bond with the cement paste. Okay, only 23 people have given your answers and around 50 people are in the class now. You can choose any option whatever you feel is right according to your understanding in give your answer. Let's see what answer is more appropriate. Is anyone not able to access polls from your side. If you're not able to access, you can give your answers in share box. Okay. Actually from the core subset, it's a we can find few reference books is recommended for this. You can find as some of suggested you can go for this book and I usually follow method on Monteiro book for conqueror technology. And some people will suggest new well as well. So it is up to your choice. Msh will be little bit easy for B tech people to follow. Okay, someone is not able to follow the question what I'm explaining you can be the post in chat box or unmit yourself and ask. Okay, let's see what is this relation now. The actually I'm not given an explanation here answer is very direct because from the lecture says that the shape of the aggregate determines the void ratio and the packing arrangement. See, as I said, if the particles are spherical, then. Then the packing will be better come back to the angular one. So if the aggregates are rounded, then the packing will be better so like that and depending upon the packing are in a simple cubic or. That also determines the packing arrangement. I think that question. A question regarding that packing system is in your current assignment. So the packing arrangement on the shape of the actually determines the void ratio and that void should be built by the paste content cement paste content. So that statement is current as well as statement base aggregate texture is responsible for its bond with the cement paste. Yeah, actually texture determines the bond if it's very rough, then the bond will be better, but if it's very smooth, then it will not be able to form the bond. So that is what the lecture says and now let's move to question five question five is a problem. I hope you guys have calpheater beside you and it's and it's very simple problem here. We are going to find the finest modulus from the sea analysis results. Okay, for the for the given grading of ground aggregate, find the finest modulus is the question. And finest modulus is nothing but it represents the weighted average sea number. So here is the formula is the summation of the cumulative percentage retained and we have to sum all these. We have to find the percentage retained from each of these things, then we have to sum it up and we have to divide it by 100 to find the finest modulus. So I hope you guys can unmute yourself and say the answer. You need not just everyone unmute and say one by one like who you need not make sound. Okay, someone is answering you can keep quite and then one person can say one answer. Okay, so here is this is a question given. Like they have given the seats is 20 mm 10 mm 4.75 till 0.25 mm. So then the person is passing like how much percentage of pass through this seats is given. Then we have to calculate the person is retained here. Okay, so if 100% is passed through that's reason what percentage will be retained over that. See some searing through 20 mm see completely done. So how much will be retained over that season from taking 100 gram of material and 100 gram is passed through 20 mm see then how much will be retained above. Okay, that is 0. Okay, so if I'm taking 100 gram and 100 gram is completely passing through that see then the person is retained is 0. Okay, then for someone else say the like for same number 10 see size a 10 mm and the percentage passing is 70%. Then how much will be retained on 10 mm see 30% 30. Then similarly for 4.75 mm. 3.93 will be on third map. 3.9 what is the 3.9 mm. Okay, let's see the answer finally certain will find it difficult to understand how to solve this. Let's see how let's go by little by small step. You have to back calculation. Yeah, you have to calculate then yeah then then for then we have to add all and then divide it. Yeah, sure right correct. Okay, so for 4.75 what will the percentage retained? Yes, just 5. Okay, 55. So similarly if we calculate all these things it's not 55 because 100 minus 45. Okay, 55. Similarly, we have that it's nothing but you can put it next and get the answer. Nothing, but if you're a minus by if you my just minus 100 will get the percentage retained. Then we need to calculate all these make some of all these percentage retained can someone say the answer percentage retained. You need to sum all these numbers percentage retained. 493. 493. 493. 493. Okay, then we need to divide it by 100. We'll get as 4.93. Is everyone able to get this answer? Yes. Okay, I think this and the problem is very simple. Okay, fine. Let's move to question 6. This question also it's very direct from the lecture. What crushing value is considered to be good for aggregate? Let me pause the question and pause. This question is very simple. I hope everyone should answer for this question. 40% 40% you think 40% is right answer? Okay. 40% man. Sorry. 40%? 40%. Let's see. Let's see. That's what. Don't say the answer. Yeah, it's better that if you guys give your answer in vote, it'll be better for everyone who are answering. If you're not able to access post, you can put your answer in chat box. Someone has given the answer to find this model is here. That's fine. Okay. Since the question is very simple, let's stop the voting by 642. Just one more minute. Okay. Time's up. Around 30 plus given year answers. And around 50 people in the class, I hope everyone should be able to access the polls and give your answer. Okay. Okay. Fine. Let's see the answer then. Actually the answer is 30%. If it do this test and if the crushing, my percentage exceeds 30%, then it's not considered to be good. And we tend to use 30% of crushing value aggregates for wear and tear surfaces like. Well, sorry. 45% or 30% are limits. Yeah. And we're in for the hearing surface, we use 30% aggregates of crushing value less than 30%. For some of the works, other works we can go up to 45% but it's considered to be good for up until 30%. And the question is directly from the lectures. If you're able to follow the lectures and the answer is very direct. Since the question is simple, let me go to question 7 now. Okay. Here this question, I'm not going to put the answer in, I'm not going to launch this question in polls. You can put your answer in chat box, okay. Which you find it's right. If you have this question is basically from chemical admixtures. So you need to find appropriate match for each of the, this. Four options from let's say to the appropriate answer from right side. So the first is self-onated naphthen, formaldehyde SNF and polycarboxyoteters, PCE. And the third is access written, what is our training, which admixtures. So here there are four options you guys, you guys need to match. Option is promote itching information, beta potential, B is beta potential, C is reduces bleeding and is very perfect. So you need to match if you find self-onated naphthen, formaldehyde for this is, you find promote itching information is the better option. And then you can match is one a to C or to a, which you find it's right. You can match like that, you can, you need to match all these four and four answers in chat box. So I'll give this screen intact for some time. Then I'll open the chat box. Let me wait for one minute, okay. Or let me wait for two minutes, okay. Let me. For two minutes, I'll wait, then we'll see in the chat box, okay. Okay. Okay. It's okay. Okay. So right, only the a, b, c, d option, let's assume that one, two, three, four, we all knew. So you can rearrange a, b, c, d, which shorter you, you find it's right. Let's see the chat box. Okay. Only two people, okay. Now three is given your answer. Okay. Let me share this screen. Time is over. Only very few people has given their answer. Okay. Let's see the answers now. Okay. Self-initant after and form only had is a second generation super plasticizer. And first generation something but ligno, so it's enough. And actually first generation second generation kind of super plasticists have work. Actually super plasticists are generally dispersed. The cement particles are part. And it increases the workability. That is how it does. Okay. It just disposes cement particles apart. And then it helps with the workability. But the function varies from self, self, self-fritten, aptan, parmal, lyrin, polycoreboxyateaters. So here the function differs. So mainly it's enough works with zeta potential. So what does it does is? So there will be negative charge with this s enough. It will impart charge to the cement particles. And then once similar sign have been once see if point of option. See once if we have, let's assume we have cement particles here around. Okay. If we have minus and one is plus then automatically what happens? It will clock together, right? But assume that if everything, if s and s is added now, then what will happen? It will impart negative charge to all these particles. So it will not stay together. Now it will try to move away. The function will occur. So this charge importing that process is called zeta potential. Okay. This function is called zeta potential. So s enough and legnesal punish works with the zeta potential. And coming to polycoreboxyateaters, they work with steric effect, which is nothing but see there will be a, with polycoreboxyateater, there will be a main chain, backbone chain. And the backbone chain, there will be grafted chains from here. There will be branchings from here. Like this, there will be branches. These are called third generation superclassicizers. So what does it does is see if the, if a plasup plasus works only by charging, importing charge, then it will, with time it start diminishing. Okay. So the effect will not be prolonged. With certain time, it tend to reduce diminishing. Okay. The effect will be diminishing. But with polycoreboxyateater, this steric effect, there is a physical effect. It will also impart charge. But in addition to that, it also has steric effect. So option E1 is B. And then polycoreboxyateater is steric effect. Okay. So here, this chains, no, there is side chains are there. No. So they will try to not, they will, they will hinder the contact. Okay. So there will be dispersion in the cement particles. They try to hinder the contact. It can understand that there will be branchings like this. They will not try to h, so there are the cement particles will try to disperse from that. Okay. This how it occurs. And with axel it is, we all know that it promotes the formation of itching it formation. So such that there will be setting occurs very fast. So and from that we can see early strain can also. And then coming to air and training adventures, it tries to entrain air bubbles which are dispersed. Okay, which will be dispersed. Dispersed air bubbles will be there. And then with the air bubbles, we can see that there will be reduction in the bleeding also. This is an additional effect due to additional power and training and make sure that air and training that makes us also try to h increase workability because this bubbles acts like a question like, a act like a question such that h there will not be h, so there will be, there will be good workability. So anyone has doubt in this question? Okay. Bob. So this is the answer for question 7. So answer is, let me put it as, keep. Yeah. Someone has given BCC here. Okay. The answer is BDAC actually. Many people have given the right answer. Okay. Nice. Okay. Next questions are direct from the lecture. You need not worry. So if you have went through the lectures, you will be able to answer. So let me launch question 8 as well as question 9. First, you can answer question 8. Then you can answer question 9. Okay. I think you can directly see the question from polls now. You can give your answers. Let me share my screen also. So what what which of the following can be used as what the proofing admixture is question 8 and question 9 is nothing but which of the following can be used as corrosion inhibitor. The options will remain same, but you need to find the answer. And this is question 9. Which of the following can be used as water corrosion inhibitor. I know you guys have similar kind of question in your assignments. Okay. So for question 8, which for calcium nitrate and then for question 9, more options for more roots was the recast. Okay. Let's see what is the right answer then. Okay. Let's see wait till 8, 36, 57, then we'll end the session. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. === Lecture 42 Transcript ===  garder 33 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . Right, madam. Okay, fine. It's right. So, in this regard it's correct. Then coming to option B, better for predation resistance. If you add SCMs to cement concrete. So then what is reaction we can expect? Positional reaction. Silica from the SCMs react with Portland, Hyundai from cement, hydration to form. Additional CSH, this is what we expect, right? So, the amount of Portlandite in control, let us in two options. One is control concrete and option to is cement concrete that contains supplementic cementitious materials. Which will have more Portlandite. Control concrete with a more Portlandite or supplement blended. Let's say it's blended. If we add supplementism, this cementitious will boil as blended. Either normal, Control concrete will have more Portlandite or blended concrete with a more Portlandite. Are you guys heard in flats? Okay. What do you guys think? Which concrete will have more Portlandite? Control concrete or blended concrete? Blended means we will add SCMs flyer, so GBS will be added. So which concrete will have more Portlandite? So in control concrete, there is no SCM, right? But in blended, how there will be SCM? So that SCM will react with a Portlandite from cement hydration. So, the amount of Portland will be less, right? So, in control concrete, there will be more Portlandite after hydration. But in blended concrete, the amount of Portlandite will be less, because we have our SCMs, which will react with Portlandite and form additional CSH. So generally, when Portlandite is there, okay, point reduction. So, if Portlandite is there, so calcium hydroxide will react, let us assume this is control concrete, okay, in control concrete. When it reacts with the carbon dioxide from atmosphere, it will form CACO3. So, it will act as a buffer. So, it will carbon dioxide will react with this calcium hydroxide to form calcium carbonate. So, which will act as a buffer. And once this calcium carbonate is formed, it will act as it, it will reduce the further increase of carbon dioxide. Okay, it becomes like a protective layer. Let us assume this is the concrete and if it is control concrete, okay, it is control concrete. And let us assume this as blended one. Okay, so initially what will happen is, this portion is there no. So, certain extent carbon dioxide can go inside, the water, so initially, the, the calcium hydroxide in the outer surface will react with the carbon dioxide from calcium carbonate. So, which will react as a protective layer, and it prevents the further increase of carbon dioxide. So, what it blended concrete, we knew that calcium hydroxide will react with, reactive silica, so it is that, we inform audacious use, then there will be no calcium hydroxide. So, what happens is, this carbon dioxide can easily enter further. Okay, so the ingress depth will be more in blended concrete. So, they have found different options for this. So, the carbon dioxide is more in the water, and the carbon dioxide is more in the water. So, they have found different options to reduce this ingress, such that if you use silica fumultel, then there will be much more for refinement. So, if the permeability is less, then calcium, sorry, carbon dioxide penetrability can be decreased to certain extent. So, they try to reduce the pore size. They try to fill all the pores, such that, we can reduce the carbonation ingress. They are coming to option C. We all knew that resistivity of concrete with SCMs are very less, because the ions in the cement concrete will be trapped by this additional CSH. So, there will be less than reactive resistivity. So, it has better corrosion resistance and coming to option D. We all knew that if we add some additional, if we add some SCMs to the cement concrete, it will be all of that, it reacts with the pore landage. And it forms additional CSH, thus that it will fill the IT state, that is interphase transition zone between aggregate and the cement paste and also whatever pore system will be further filled by this additional CSH. Then there will be pore refinement. So, the pore sizes will reduce, such that, so all these options are correct, it is a better carbonation resistance. It has pore carbonation resistance, it is coming to blended concrete. So, if you guys have any doubt, you can unmute and ask or as we can leave. As you guys have any doubt? Thank you all. You guys have any doubt, you can unmute yourself and ask. Others can leave. Thank you all.